Title: Agentic AI for Personalized Physiotherapy: A Multi-Agent Framework for Generative Video Training and Real-Time Pose Correction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.21154v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Apr 2026 00:17:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 3

Markdown Content:
# Agentic AI for Personalized Physiotherapy: A Multi-Agent Framework for Generative Video Training and Real-Time Pose Correction 

Abhishek Dharmaratnakar, Srivaths Ranganathan, Anushree Sinha, Debanshu Das 

Google, Mountain View, USA Email: {dharmaratnakar, srivaths, sinhaanushree, debanshu}@google.com 

Abstract —At-home physiotherapy compliance remains criti-cally low due to a lack of personalized supervision and dynamic feedback. Existing digital health solutions rely on static, pre-recorded video libraries or generic 3D avatars that fail to account for a patient’s specific injury limitations or home environment. In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-Agent System (MAS) architecture that leverages Generative AI and computer vision to close the tele-rehabilitation loop. Our framework consists of four specialized micro-agents: a Clinical Extraction Agent that parses unstructured medical notes into kinematic constraints; a Video Synthesis Agent that utilizes foundational video generation models to create personalized, patient-specific exercise videos; a Vision Processing Agent for real-time pose estimation; and a Diagnostic Feedback Agent that issues corrective instructions. We present the system architecture, detail the prototype pipeline using Large Language Models and MediaPipe, and outline our clinical evaluation plan. This work demonstrates the feasibility of combining generative media with agentic autonomous decision-making to scale personalized patient care safely and effectively. 

Index Terms —Generative AI, Multi-Agent Systems, Telemedicine, Physiotherapy, Computer Vision, Digital Health, Explainable AI 

I. Introduction 

Decentralizing physical rehabilitation to the home is paramount for scaling global healthcare. However, self-directed at-home physiotherapy is plagued by chronically low compliance rates and high instances of incorrect exercise execution [1]. Traditional tele-rehabilitation platforms predom-inantly offer static video tutorials or asynchronous monitoring. These conventional systems lack the semantic intelligence required to provide real-time, personalized feedback, leaving patients vulnerable to secondary injuries and suboptimal re-covery trajectories. While sensory platforms and virtual coaching systems [2] have attempted to bridge this gap, they often rely on cum-bersome hardware or rigid, hard-coded rule engines. The advent of Agentic Artificial Intelligence (Agentic AI) offers a transformative paradigm. Unlike passive machine learning pipelines, Agentic AI utilizes autonomous micro-agents that plan, execute, and collaborate to solve complex reasoning tasks dynamically. This paper introduces a Multi-Agent System (MAS) specif-ically architected for personalized physiotherapy. Our core contribution is an end-to-end framework that translates un-structured clinical prescriptions into a continuous, real-time feedback loop. It dynamically generates hyper-personalized training videos respecting biomechanical limits and utilizes real-time computer vision to enforce those limits during patient execution. 

II. Related Work 

A. Computer Vision and Pose Estimation in Digital Health 

Recent studies demonstrate the efficacy of markerless pose estimation algorithms, such as MediaPipe and YOLO-Pose, for the real-time assessment of physiotherapy movements [4], [5]. While contemporary Vision-Language Models (VLMs) demonstrate broad capabilities, recent evaluations indicate they struggle with fine-grained spatio-temporal tracking required for stroke and injury rehabilitation [6]. This limitation ne-cessitates our hybrid approach: delegating spatial tracking to specialized vision models and high-level reasoning to Large Language Models (LLMs). 

B. Generative AI and Video Synthesis 

Generative AI is rapidly reshaping physical health manage-ment. Early applications utilized Generative Adversarial Net-works (GANs) to synthesize missing motion data for rehabili-tation classification [7]. Currently, diffusion models and foun-dational video transformers enable high-fidelity biomedical video synthesis [8]. While the generation of synthetic humans (deepfakes) introduces ethical considerations, its application in physical health allows for the creation of tailored virtual avatars that can safely demonstrate tactical and physical move-ments [9]. Our system utilizes this capability to synthesize digital “physio-twins” tailored to the patient’s precise injury constraints. 

C. Explainable AI (XAI) in Precision Medicine 

Clinical applications of AI require strict transparency. The integration of Explainable AI (XAI) in digital health is critical to fostering trust among both clinicians and patients [3]. In our architecture, XAI is inherently built into the Diagnostic Feedback Agent, which maps detected kinematic deviations directly back to the original physician’s explicit constraints, ensuring all automated guidance is clinically interpretable. 

> arXiv:2604.21154v1 [cs.AI] 22 Apr 2026

III. Multi-Agent System Architecture 

Our MAS architecture acts as a localized, intelligent loop between the clinician and the patient. It comprises four distinct micro-agents that communicate via a unified, shared state object ( PatientState ).  

> Figure 1. The proposed pipeline orchestration demonstrating the cyclic handoff between different agents

Algorithm 1 Multi-Agent Pipeline for Real-Time Physiother-apy Assessment 

Require: Unstructured clinical prescription 𝑁 𝑟 𝑥 , Continuous RGB camera frames 𝐹 𝑡 

Ensure: Continuous real-time corrective feedback 𝐶 𝑡  

> 1:

Initialize Shared State: 𝑆 ← { notes : 𝑁 𝑟 𝑥 , constraints :

∅, pose : ∅, feedback : ∅}  

> 2:

Initialize Agents: Clinical Extraction ( 𝐴 𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑛 ), Video Syn-thesis ( 𝐴 𝑉𝑖𝑑 ), Vision Processing ( 𝐴 𝑉𝑖𝑠 ) 

> 3:

{Phase 1: Pre-Session Extraction & Synthesis } 

> 4:

𝑆. constraints ← 𝐴 𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑛 .Process (𝑆. notes ) 

> 5:

𝑆. video_url ← 𝐴 𝑉𝑖𝑑 .Process (𝑆. constraints ) 

> 6:

{Phase 2: Real-Time Diagnostic Feedback Loop } 

> 7:

Let 𝜃 𝑡 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 ← 𝑆. constraints [max_angle ] 

> 8:

Let 𝛿 ← 5◦ {Acceptable error margin}  

> 9:

while rehabilitation session is active do  

> 10:

Capture instantaneous frame 𝐹 𝑡  

> 11:

𝑆. pose ← 𝐴 𝑉𝑖𝑠 .Process (𝐹 𝑡 ) 

> 12:

𝜃 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟 𝑒𝑛𝑡 ← Extract target joint angle from 𝑆. pose  

> 13:

if 𝜃 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟 𝑒𝑛𝑡 > (𝜃 𝑡 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 + 𝛿 ) then  

> 14:

𝐶 𝑡 ← “Warning: Arm is too high. Lower to avoid strain.”  

> 15:

else if 𝜃 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟 𝑒𝑛𝑡 < (𝜃 𝑡 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 − 𝛿 ) then  

> 16:

𝐶 𝑡 ← “Raise your arm slightly higher.”  

> 17:

else  

> 18:

𝐶 𝑡 ← “Perfect form. Hold.”  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

𝑆. feedback ← 𝐶 𝑡  

> 21:

Output: 𝐶 𝑡 to patient via audio/text interface  

> 22:

end while 

A. Clinical Extraction Agent 

The pipeline is initiated by the Clinical Extraction Agent. This agent processes unstructured text such as post-operative notes or physio prescriptions and translates them into a stan-dardized JSON schema. Table I illustrates the mapping of clinical free-text into the structured boundaries that govern the entire system’s safety protocols.            

> Table I
> Clinical Extraction: Text to Constraint Mapping
> Unstructured Clinical Note Extracted JSON Constraint
> “Patient recovering from rotator cuff tear. Max 90 deg shoulder abduc-tion.”
> {joint: "shoulder", axis: "abduction", max_angle: 90, urgency: "high" }
> “Ensure knee does not track past the toes during squats. Go slow.”
> {joint: "knee", spatial_rel: "behind_toe", max_velocity: 0.5 }

B. Video Synthesis Agent 

Generic exercise videos are dangerous for patients with limited range of motion (ROM). The Video Synthesis Agent takes the JSON constraints and constructs a highly specific generative prompt. For instance, it prompts the foundational video model to generate a virtual avatar performing a shoulder abduction that explicitly stops at 89 ◦. This provides the patient with a visually accurate target that does not encourage over-extension. 

C. Vision Processing Agent 

Running locally to preserve patient privacy, the Vision Processing Agent utilizes lightweight pose estimation models [4]. It isolates key anatomical landmarks (e.g., acromion, lateral epicondyle, ulnar styloid) to calculate instantaneous joint angles. This agent operates at ≥ 30 frames per second (FPS) to ensure kinematic data is captured without latency. 

D. Diagnostic Feedback Agent 

The Diagnostic Feedback Agent represents the “virtual coach.” It continuously evaluates the output of the Vision Agent against the Clinical Agent’s constraints. As outlined in Table II, it employs a hybrid deterministic-generative approach to deliver feedback that is both safe and empathetic. 

IV. System Implementation and Orchestration 

To validate the conceptual architecture, we developed a prototype pipeline in Python. The system state is maintained dynamically, simulating continuous handoffs between the au-tonomous agents. The core orchestration logic, directly reflecting our system design, ensures strict state management. The deterministic rules applied in the diagnostic feedback algorithm ensure that LLM hallucinations cannot override hard physiological safety limits. Table II 

Diagnostic Feedback Decision Matrix 

Kinematic State Condition Generated Feedback Action 

𝐴 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 > 𝐴 𝑚𝑎𝑥 + 5◦ Critical Violation Stop. Immediate warn-ing issued: “Arm is too high. Lower to avoid strain.” 

𝐴 𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 10 ◦ ≤ 𝐴 ≤ 𝐴 𝑚𝑎𝑥 Optimal Zone Praise. “Perfect form. Hold this position.” 

𝐴 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 < 𝐴 𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 15 ◦ Under-extension Encourage. “Raise your arm slightly higher if comfortable.” 

𝑉 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 > 𝑉 𝑠𝑎 𝑓 𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 High Velocity Pace. “Slow down your movement to maintain control.” 

Figure 2. Example of the generated patient interface: The Video Synthesis Agent creates a personalized “physio-twin” demonstrator. 

V. Preliminary Evaluation and Future Work 

While this work represents an architectural framework, pre-liminary bench-testing of the underlying components estimates promising metrics (Table III). The latency of the Vision Processing Agent (utilizing MediaPipe) is estimated to be well within the acceptable bounds for real-time human-computer interaction ( < 50 ms). 

Table III 

Preliminary System Component Estimated Metrics 

Component Metric Estimated Value Target Threshold 

Pose Estimation Latency 28 ms < 50 ms Joint Angle Error Margin ±3.2◦ < 5◦

Clinical Text Parsing Acc. 96.5% > 95% 

Video Synthesis Generation 45 sec < 60 sec 

The primary challenge remains the Video Synthesis Agent. Ensuring absolute temporal consistency and anatomical ac-curacy in synthesized videos requires further refinement of diffusion models [8]. Future work entails deploying this MAS in a full-scale clinical trial to evaluate joint-angle tracking accuracy against wearable inertial measurement units (IMUs). 

VI. Conclusion 

This paper introduced a novel Multi-Agent framework de-signed to solve the critical challenges of at-home physiother-apy. By combining the semantic reasoning of Large Language Models to extract explicit clinical constraints, the generative capabilities of modern video synthesis to create customized demonstrations, and the precision of real-time computer vi-sion, our system establishes a closed-loop, intelligent rehabil-itation environment. 

VII. Acknowledgements 

The Authors acknowledge the use of AI for refining text and images. 

References 

[1] A. K. Triantafyllidis and A. Tsanas, “Applications of Machine Learning in Real-Life Digital Health Interventions: Review of the Literature,” 

Journal of Medical Internet Research , vol. 21, no. 4, p. e12286, Apr. 2019. [2] V. D. Tsakanikas et al. , “Evaluating the Performance of Balance Physio-therapy Exercises Using a Sensory Platform: The Basis for a Persuasive Balance Rehabilitation Virtual Coaching System,” Frontiers in Digital Health , vol. 2, Nov. 2020. [3] B. Allen, “The Promise of Explainable AI in Digital Health for Precision Medicine: A Systematic Review,” Journal of Personalized Medicine , vol. 14, no. 277, 2024. [4] V. García and O. C. Santos, “Towards Intelligent Assessment in Person-alized Physiotherapy with Computer Vision,” Sensors , vol. 25, no. 3436, 2025. [5] F. M. da Silva Luz, “Enhancing Virtual Physiotherapy Through Com-puter Vision and Pose Estimation,” Master’s thesis, ISCTE - Instituto Universitário de Lisboa, 2024. [6] V. Li et al. , “The Potential and Limitations of Vision-Language Models for Human Motion Understanding: A Case Study in Data-Driven Stroke Rehabilitation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17727v1 , 2025. [7] L. Li and A. Vakanski, “Generative Adversarial Networks for Genera-tion and Classification of Physical Rehabilitation Movement Episodes,” 

International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 428–436, Oct. 2018. [8] N. Algethami, T. Iqbal, and I. Ullah, “Generative AI for biomedical video synthesis: a review,” Artificial Intelligence Review , vol. 58, no. 392, Oct. 2025. [9] T. Fan and M. M. Moghimi, “A Review of Deepfake Technology in Physical Health Management and Application,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems , 2026.