Title: Time-series Meets Complex Motion Modeling: Robust and Computational-effective Motion Predictor for Multi-object Tracking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00362v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:38:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# Time-series Meets Complex Motion Modeling: Robust and Computational-effective Motion Predictor for Multi-object Tracking 

## Nhat-Tan Do 1,2 , Le-Huy Tu 1,2 , Nhi Ngoc-Yen Nguyen 1,2 ,Dieu-Phuong Nguyen 1,2 , Trong-Hop Do 1,2* 

> 1*

Faculty of Information Science and Engineering, University of Information Technology, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. 

> 2

Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hopdt@uit.edu.vn; Contributing authors: 21522575@gm.uit.edu.vn; 21522173@gm.uit.edu.vn; 21521231@gm.uit.edu.vn; 21520091@gm.uit.edu.vn; 

Abstract 

Multi-object tracking (MOT) is critical in numerous real-world applications, including surveillance, autonomous driving, and robotics. Accurately predicting object motion is fundamental to MOT, but current methods struggle with the complexities of real-world, non-linear motion (e.g., sudden stops, sharp turns). While recent research has gravitated towards increasingly complex and compu-tationally expensive generative models to tackle this problem, their practical utility is often constrained. This paper challenges that paradigm, arguing that such complexity is not only unnecessary but can be outperformed by a more efficient, purpose-built approach. We introduce the Temporal Convolutional 

Motion Predictor (TCMP), a novel framework for MOT that leverages a mod-ified Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) featuring dilated convolutions and a regression head. This design allows for effective motion prediction across arbitrary temporal context lengths. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance, specifically improves upon the previous best method in several key metrics: HOTA (a measure of overall tracking accuracy) increases from 62.3% to 63.4%, IDF1 (a measure of identity preserva-tion) rises from 63.0% to 65.0%, and AssA (a measure of association accuracy) improves from 47.2% to 49.1%. Significantly, TCMP achieves this performance while being highly efficient; it has only 0.014 times the parameters and requires only 0.05 times the computational cost (FLOPs) compared to the SOTA method. 

1

> arXiv:2605.00362v1 [cs.CV] 1 May 2026

Fig. 1 : The overall architecture of our proposed Temporal Convolutional Motion Predictor 

while is only 0.014 times the size (in terms of parameters) and requires only 0.05 times the computational cost (in terms of FLOPs). These findings highlight the robustness of our method to advance MOT systems by ensuring adaptability, accuracy, and efficiency in complex tracking environments.  

> Keywords: Temporal Convolutional Network, Motion Prediction, Multi-object Tracking, Pattern Recognition

# 1 Introduction 

Multi-object Tracking (MOT) is a critical task in computer vision that involves detect-ing and tracking multiple objects across frames in a video sequence. The task has many real-life applications, including autonomous driving, surveillance, sports ana-lytics, and robotics. The ability to track multiple objects accurately in real-time is essential for these applications to function effectively and safely. Multi-object Tracking can be broadly categorized into linear and non-linear motion. Linear motion, where objects move at relatively constant speeds and direc-tions (e.g., pedestrians walking on a straight sidewalk), is considerably easier to model and predict. In these scenarios, the Kalman Filter, a well-known classical approach in MOT, has been proven to work effectively even under the assumption of linear motion. However, real-world scenarios frequently involve non-linear motion. Examples 2include objects suddenly stopping or changing speed, sharp turns, complex interac-tions, or occlusions. Modeling these unpredictable movements significantly increases the complexity of the tracking problem. Addressing this non-linearity is a major focus of ongoing research in MOT. To advance research on non-linear motion prediction, specialized benchmarks like DanceTrack [1], and SportsMOT [2] have been introduced. These datasets present complex and dynamic environments and involve tracking objects with unpre-dictable and non-linear trajectories, such as dancers or athletes. Unlike the relatively predictable motion found in pedestrian-focused datasets [3, 4], DanceTrack and SportsMOT pose significant challenges due to rapid changes in direction, speed, and complex interactions. Another challenge in DanceTrack and SportsMOT is that the objects often wear uniforms or have similar appearances, making the Re-ID module perform poorly. The varying difficulty levels in these benchmarks challenge the robust-ness and adaptability of tracking algorithms. In such cases, the Kalman Filter is less effective, as it struggles to handle the non-linear motion patterns. Despite significant advancements, one of the critical problems of motion prediction in Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) lies in balancing model complexity and performance. Recent advancements often achieve superior performance with complex and large mod-els. For instance, Lv et al. [5] proposes a decoupled diffusion-based motion predictor (D 2MP), a diffusion-based motion prediction model that achieves impressive results on non-linear benchmarks like DanceTrack [1] and SportsMOT [2]. While achieving notable results, the design complexity and computational demands of D 2MP are sub-stantial. On the other hand, many efforts, both utilizing [6–8] or not utilizing a neural network [9], although not as complicated, are not as successful when compared to larger models. This work proposes a novel Temporal Convolutional Motion Predictor (TCMP) that effectively addresses this gap. By leveraging the efficiency of convolutional operations in processing arbitrary-range temporal information, our method achieves superior performance while maintaining an exceptionally lightweight architecture. Specifically, TCMP serves as an advanced motion prediction module designed to integrate into standard tracking-by-detection frameworks (e.g., those using SORT or BYTE association). By generating more accurate motion estimates, particularly for non-linear trajectories, TCMP provides higher quality inputs to the crucial data asso-ciation stage, thereby improving overall tracking performance. Theoretically, TCMP offers superior performance by directly addressing the causality of motion predic-tion in online MOT. It focuses simply on one-step-ahead forecasting. This approach avoids the cumulative errors and computational inefficiencies often associated with autoregressive modeling. TCMP leverages dilated convolutions within a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) to efficiently capture temporal dependencies in his-torical data, expanding the context length the model can capture without expensive computational costs. We demonstrate that TCMP not only surpasses prior state-of-the-art models in key benchmarks such as DanceTrack, MOT, and SportsMOT but also does so with a fraction of the computational complexity and parameter count. These findings underscore the potential of smaller, simpler models to redefine the state of the art in MOT. Our contribution can be summarized as follows: 3• We provide an in-depth analysis of the causality in motion prediction for online MOT, justifying our decision to focus on one-step-ahead forecasting rather than autoregressive modeling. This approach avoids cumulative errors and computational inefficiencies, offering a more robust framework for motion prediction. 

• We propose a novel Temporal Convolutional Motion Predictor (TCMP) for motion prediction in MOT, designed to be lightweight, balance simplicity and performance. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to fully use a temporal convolu-tional network as a motion prediction model. By employing convolutional operations for temporal modeling, TCMP achieves SOTA performance with significantly fewer parameters and lower FLOPs compared to previous SOTA, demonstrating that smaller models can outperform more complex architectures. 

• Through comprehensive experiments on diverse, challenging benchmarks (Dance-Track and SportsMOT), we demonstrate our model’s superior performance in handling challenging scenarios, including occlusions, missed detections, and complex motions. Qualitative comparisons highlight its ability to maintain object identities under severe occlusion and trajectory crossing. 

# 2 Related Works 

Multi-object tracking (MOT) has advanced significantly through progress in object detection, motion modeling, and data association. Motion models predict the future positions of objects, a core component of MOT. A robust motion prediction model helps significantly improve the overall MOT performance since it can (1) reduce the impact of noisy detection and (2) produce a reliable input for the association step. Motion models fall into two broad categories: linear and non-linear. While linear motion models like the Kalman Filter are efficient for simple trajectories, real-world scenarios frequently involve non-linear motion (e.g., an object suddenly stopping or changing speed, sharp turns, complex interactions, or occlusions), significantly increasing the tracking problem’s complexity. 

## 2.1 MOT in Linear Motion Scenarios 

The rapid development of object detection [10–12] has contributed significantly and made Tracking-by-detection become the dominant paradigm in the problem of Multi-object Tracking in recent years. In the Tracking-by-detection paradigm, most current methodologies are built upon the simple SORT framework, which uses Kalman Filter (KF) to perform state estimation in 2-dimensional image space and frame-by-frame data association using the IoU (Intersect-over-Union) metric with the Hungarian algo-rithm. KF works as a Motion prediction model in the SORT framework. Algorithms like SORT [13], DeepSORT [14], FairMOT [15], ByteTrack [16], and OC-SORT [9] utilize KF, assuming constant object velocity and direction over short intervals. Zhang et al. [16] point out that the performance bottleneck is the detection part, not the association part. Therefore, a robust detector with a simple association strat-egy still leads to good tracking results. Many efforts [15, 17–20] try to fuse detection and tracking into a unified framework. 4After the detection step, accurately match tracks from previous frames with detec-tion boxes in the current frame. This step, in the tracking-by-detection paradigm, is the association step. SORT [13] pioneered a lightweight association method using motion cues. While efficient, its simplicity can falter under challenging conditions like occlusions or camera motion. Extensions such as DeepSORT [14] incorporated appearance cues, enhancing robustness in complex environments. Similarly, MOTDT [21] leveraged appearance-based matching before relying on motion cues for resid-ual associations. Further advancements like BoTSORT [22] refined these strategies with camera motion compensation and improved distance metric fusion, achiev-ing state-of-the-art results in scenarios involving occlusions and missed detections. These innovations collectively enhance MOT’s reliability, addressing key challenges in real-world applications. FairMOT [15] unified detection and re-identification (ReID) tasks within asingle network, addressing optimization imbalances and improving feature represen-tation. This approach proved effective in dense scenes. ByteTrack [16] introduced a confidence-based association strategy, utilizing both high- and low-confidence detections to handle occlusions and motion blur. In linear motion scenarios, these methods, particularly those incorporating appear-ance information and robust association techniques, have proven highly effective, achieving strong performance on benchmarks featuring predictable object trajectories. 

## 2.2 MOT in Non-linear Motion Scenarios 

While the Kalman Filter and related methods excel in linear motion scenarios, they struggle to accurately model the complexities of non-linear motion, which is preva-lent in real-world environments. Non-linear motion involves abrupt changes in speed and direction, complex interactions between objects, and frequent occlusions, making prediction significantly more difficult. To address this challenge, more advanced motion models have been developed. Optical flow-based models [21] calculate pixel displacements between frames to derive motion information. RNN-based and LSTM-based models [6, 23–26] leverage sequence modeling in latent space, capturing temporal dependencies. Transformer-based mod-els [27–29] utilize attention mechanisms for long-range motion dependencies, offering richer representations. These methods require a large amount of training data, expensive computational resources, and, as a result, long training times. Despite these advancements, accurately and efficiently predicting non-linear motion in MOT remains a significant open challenge, and is the primary focus of our work. 

# 3 Foundation of Motion Prediction 

## 3.1 Problem Statement 

We are interested in tracking objects by locating their bounding boxes. Formally, we define Ot the object O at time t, the bounding box Bt = ( xt, y t, w t, h t)⊤ ∈ R4

represents the coordinate in 2-dimensional space, width and height of Ot, respectively. 5Let TM = ( B1, . . . , Bt, . . . , Bm) ∈ R4×m represents the trajectory of object O from time 1 ≤ t ≤ m. Note that m may vary for each object O, since all objects may not appear simultaneously. We define Mt ∈ R4 as the ”motion” of the object O in a given time t. This motion presentation is calculated as the difference between the bounding box in the frame at time t and the previous frame t − 1: 

Mt = Bt − Bt−1 = (∆ xt, ∆yt, ∆wt, ∆ht) (1) As we stack Bt with its corresponding Mt together, we form the Context Ct ∈ R8

as following: 

Ct = ( xt, y t, w t, h t, ∆xt, ∆yt, ∆wt, ∆ht)⊤ (2) Thus, Cm = [ C1, . . . , Ct, . . . , Cm] ∈ R8×m represents the temporal information of O up to m. It is necessary to define Cm as it is proven in Lv et al. [5] that (1) using the positional information from bounding box Bt−1 only can lead to significant deviations of prediction, and (2) using the motion change information Mt−1 only can introduce difficulty in generation. Using this defined contextual representation, the motion prediction problem can be framed as modeling a function f : R8×m → R4 parameterized by W that map the given context Cm to a prediction ̂ Mm+1 :̂

Mm+1 = f (Cm, W ) (3) This formula aligns with the causality of Online Multi-object Tracking scenarios, where the estimation in time t = m + 1 only depends on information from previous time steps t ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , m }.We empirically design the parameters W as a set of dilated convolution ker-nels within a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN), a Regression Head, and a parameter α. The following section describes the detailed architecture and shows the effectiveness of this parameterized approach in multi-object tracking. 

## 3.2 Analysis of the Causality of Motion Prediction in Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) 

Motion prediction in MOT is a causal framework: The prediction at any time step 

t + 1 depends solely on information available up to time t, and future observations do not influence current prediction. This causality introduces several considerations: 

• Processing information causally . The direct consideration is about the capa-bility of the model to accurately predict the next motion without any access to future observations. As we state the problem in Section 3.1, our model is causal by predicting ̂ Mm+1 using only Cm.

• Representing Temporal Information . A critical challenge in causal motion prediction is effectively capturing the temporal dependencies in historical data. Models must leverage past observations to infer motion patterns while respecting the causal constraints of the problem. We solve this problem by leveraging a stack 6of dilated convolution kernels, expanding the context length the model can capture without expensive computational costs. Further explanation is in Section 4.2.1. 

• Error Accumulation . In causal systems, prediction errors at time t+1 can add up to subsequent predictions, potentially leading to drift over time. The model design needs a mechanism to mitigate error accumulation and maintain robustness over time. We solve this problem by modeling TCMP as a regression model instead of an autoregressive model. Further explanation is in Section 4.2. 

# 4 Proposed Temporal Convolutional Motion Predictor 

In this section, we describe our proposed method of using a Temporal Convolutional Network as a motion predictor, with extra modifications to make it suitable for the problem of motion prediction for Multi-object Tracking. 

## 4.1 Overall Architecture of Temporal Convolutional Motion Predictor 

The overall architecture of our proposed Temporal Convolutional Motion Predictor (TCMP) is illustrated in Figure 1. Our model is built upon a Temporal Convolu-tional Network (TCN). This TCN serves as the core component for modeling temporal dependencies in motion prediction. The TCN effectively captures long-range tempo-ral patterns and non-linear dynamics across object trajectories, providing a rich and robust representation of motion features. A lightweight Regression Head subsequently processes these extracted features to accurately predict the future motion Mm+1 . This seamless integration of the TCN ensures that the motion prediction leverages both the strength of temporal modeling and computational efficiency. 

## 4.2 Temporal Convolutional Network for motion predictor 

4.2.1 Dilated Convolution and Traditional Temporal Convolutional Network 

A standard convolution of 2 functions x and w results in a new function s as follows: 

s(a) = ( x ∗ w)( a) = ∑

> t

x(a − t) · w(t) (4) In the context of motion prediction, Equation 4 can be explained as follows: s(a)is the output at a specific time step a after applying the convolution operation. s(a)can be thought of as the predicted motion or position at time step a. x is the input signal or time series. In this paper, x corresponds to the contextual information C,which includes the bounding box coordinates and motion information of the object. Thus, x(a−t) represents the context at a t time before a. w represents the convolution kernel or filter. Here, w represents the parameterized kernels W within the TCN. t is the index variable for the summation, representing the span of the kernel. x ∗ w is the convolution operation between the input signal and the kernel. 7(a) stack of standard causal convolutional layers   

> (b) stack of dilated causal convolutional layers

Fig. 2 : Visualization of a stack of standard causal convolutional layers and a stack of dilated causal convolutional layers. Lines indicate the temporal dependencies con-tributing to the receptive field for each layer, showing which input steps influence later computations. With the same 3 layers of convolution kernels, the standard stack only captures a receptive field of size of 4, while the dilated counterpart captures a context length of up to 8 with only 3 layers. 8Dilated convolution is an expanded version of the convolution operation in Equation 4 that inserts gaps between the kernel elements. Formally, A dilated convolution with the dilation factor d can be defined as follows: 

s(a) = ( x ∗d w)( a) = ∑

> t

x(a − d · t) · w(t) (5) This simple formula plays a critical role in our design choice. Systematically, we can expand the receptive field of our model by stacking multiple dilated convolution kernels together. For instance, as shown in Figure 2b, a stack of 3 2 × 2 dilated convolution kernels with dilated factor 1 , 2, 4, respectively, can capture a receptive field of size 8. Consequently, in the context of motion prediction, with the same stack, our model has a context length of m = 8. For comparison, its counterpart - a stack of standard convolution kernels (Figure 2a) - with the same number of layers can capture only m = 4 context information. Temporal Convolutional Network is a stack of dilated convolution layers. The nature of ”stack” and ”dilated convolution” plays a crucial role in our design choice for building a computationally efficient yet robust motion prediction model. As stated in Section 4.2.1, a systematic stack of dilated convolution kernels can expand the receptive field with just a few layers, eliminating the need to increase complexity or computational cost. Theoretically, the dilation factor increases exponentially in depth, resulting in an exponentially large receptive field. A block of kernels with dilation factors of 1 , 2, 4 has a receptive field of size 8 and is more efficient and non-linear compared to the counterpart 1 × 8 standard convolution. 

4.2.2 Problem of traditional Temporal Convolutional Network 

Theoretically, we can model a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) as a gener-ator or an autoregressive model that predicts the box Bm+1 using previous boxes (B1, . . . , Bt, . . . , Bm), then continue predicting Bm+2 in the autoregressive fashion. There are two reasons that we choose not to use TCN this way. 

• One-step-ahead forecasting is enough. Motion prediction, specifically for MOT, requires only the immediate predicted position in the current timestamp to be matched with detections. At each time step, the predicted position will be assessed and refined based on the detection information from the external detector. The matched detections will be stored and used as the trajectory of the given object rather than the predicted bounding boxes from the motion predictor. Therefore, the need for generative ability or to predict multiple steps simultaneously is limited. Moreover, the complex and computationally expensive ”feature” of the generative or autoregressive model is unnecessary and overkill. 

• Preventing Autoregressive Drift. The potential cumulative error occurring dur-ing the autoregressive process can lead to poor performance over time, which is hard to overcome, especially in noisy situations using detections from an external detection model like the tracking-by-detection paradigm. 9Our proposed model leverages the TCN in a direct manner: The TCN captures temporal dependencies and models non-linear motion dynamics, transforming raw temporal inputs into rich motion features. These features are then passed to the Regression Head, which predicts the motion Mm+1 in a single step. This design bal-ances simplicity and computational efficiency while ensuring superior performance in motion prediction tasks for MOT. 

4.2.3 Modified Temporal Convolutional Network 

Our TCN is a series of K identical blocks, where the output of each block is the input to the next block. Each block takes an initial prediction of the prior block and refines it. The only exception is the first block, which has no prior block; thus, its input is the overall input, namely Cm.Each block is a stack of L layers, E(l) ∈ RFl×m, where Fl is defined as the number of the convolutional kernels in the l layer and m is the input context length. In each layer, l, the input is passed through a series of operations, including a dilated causal convolution operation, an activation function, and a dropout. The dilation rate increases for consecutive layers within a block, such that the layer l-th will have the dilation rate dl = 2 l−1. Formally, with reference to Equation 5, the intermediate hidden feature at time t of layer l-th in block k-th, denoted as hk,l t is calculated as: 

hk,l t = ϕl

[

(hk,l −1 

> t

∗dl W l)( t)

]

(6) = ϕl

[ ∑

> a=s+dlt

hk,l −1 

> t−a

(a) × W k,l (t − a)

]

(7) where ∗dl is the dilated convolution operation, W k,l is the parameterized convo-lution kernel at layer l, ϕ(·) is the activation function. We adopt the gated activation unit mechanism [30], as follows: 

ϕL(h) = tanh( W k,l f ∗dl h) ⊙ σ(W k,l g ∗dl h), (8) where ⊙ is an element-wise multiplication operation, tanh( ·) is the tanh activation function, σ(·) is the sigmoid function, W k,l f is the ”filter” convolution kernel in layer 

l of block k, and W k,l g is the ”gate” convolution kernel in layer l block k. Let ˆ zk,l and 

zk,l be the skipped connection from layer l of block k and the result after layer l of block k, respectively. ˆzk,l =

(

ϕL

(hk,l −1) ∗ W k,l 

> skip

)

(9) 

zk,l = 1

√2

[

ϕL

(hk,l −1) ∗ W k,l  

> out

+ zk,l −1]

(10) 10 where 1√2 is the normalization term, W k,l  

> skip

and W k,l  

> out

are two 1 × 1 parameterized convolution kernel of block k, and zk−1 is the output from previous block. We define 

z0 = Cm so that Equation 9 will be valid for all 1 ≤ k ≤ K.Although TCN can work with any arbitrary context length, we restrain it to using the max length of T = 16. This aligns well with the receptive field of our architecture, which has a kernel size of F = 2 and a number of layers L = 4. This decision is based on empirical experiments and is discussed in detail in Section 5.6. Note that our model retains the well-utilized ability to work with trajectories of any length. 

## 4.3 Regression Head 

After data is passed through the TCN, we now have 2 sources of information: the parameterized skipped connections {ˆz1, . . . , ˆzL} and the output from the final block 

zK . We aggregate all skipped connections to create a hierarchical representation ˆ z as follows: ˆzi =

> L

∑

> j

ˆzji ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , L } (11) Which results in a feature of the same size as zK . To utilize ˆ z and zK without explicitly indicating their significance, we introduce a new learned parameter α ∈

R that can be trained alongside our model. The combined feature z ∈ RFL×m is calculated as: 

z = αz K + (1 − α)ˆ z (12) We find that the α varies across different scenarios. Specifically, in the trained model reported in this paper, α = 0.557 and α = 0.482 on DanceTrack and SportsMOT, respectively. This difference in the α value implies that the contribution of zK and ˆ z differ depending on the scenario, and the α parameter can dynamically adapt to these variations. Global average pooling (GAP) is employed to aggregate features across the tempo-ral dimension of z, resulting in a compact representation for each channel. Specifically, with FL = 4, the result of GAP of z will be the predicted motion ̂ Mm+1 , such that: ̂

M{f } 

> m+1

= 1

m

> m

∑

> t=1

zf,t ∀f ∈ { 1, . . . , F L} (13) 

## 4.4 Loss function 

We use the L2 (Mean Squared Error) as our Loss function. Given the ground truth 

Mm+1 and the predicted motion ̂ Mm+1 , the MSE loss is calculated as follows: 

L = L2(Mm+1 ,̂ Mm+1 ) = ∑ (Mm+1 −̂ Mm+1 )2 (14) In our experiments, models trained with L2 loss have a more stable training process and perform better overall compared to models trained with smooth L1.11 4.5 Data Augmentation 

We introduced a new data augmentation process for training the TCMP to utilize the capability of handling contexts of arbitrary length and noisy inputs. 

Add noises . We strategically add noise into training Cm by first sampling a noise vector N ∈ RB×m×4 with B is the batch size, m is the max context length and 4 is for ( x, y, w, h ), respectively. The noise vector N is sampled from a normal distribution 

Ni ∼ N 4(μ, σ ) where μ ∈ R4 and σ ∈ R4×4. Specifically, we use μ = 0 and σ = 0 .001 in our training process, as this is the empirical basic for setting noise value. After being sampled, N will be add to Cm as follows: 

C(b,i ) 

> t

= C(b,i ) 

> t

+ Nb,t,i ∀b ∈ { 1, . . . , B }, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , 4}, ∀t ∈ { 1, . . . , m } (15) Where C(b,i ) 

> t

is the value i-th of time t in batch b. This operation makes the motion information (last 4 value in Ci) misaligned; we recalculate it using Equation 1 and Equation 2. This strategy simulates the noisy and unreliable detections from the external detectors, making the trained model robust and less sensitive to noises. 

Random Context Lengths . To train the model with varying context lengths, we randomly truncate the contexts in batches after they are created with a fixed context length of m. We sample a random number m′ from a uniform distribution, 

m′ ∼ U [4 ,m ], and only use m′ latest contexts instead of m. Thus, the new context is now become: 

C′ = {Ct} ∀t ∈ { m − m′, . . . , m } (16) With this setup, contexts will have a minimum length of 4 and a maximum length of m.

# 5 Experiments 

## 5.1 Datasets 

We performed experiments on two well-known complex motion datasets, namely DanceTrack[1] and SportsMOT[2]. Both datasets were recently proposed for multi-object tracking, specifically on human tracking, with complex motion patterns and uniform appearances. The objects in both datasets are frequently occluded and crossovers, raising a significant challenge to current methods that assume linear motion. The DanceTrack dataset emphasizes uniform appearance and diverse body gestures, while the main challenge of SportsMOT arises from high-speed camera movement and occlusion. 

## 5.2 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate our method on Higher Order Metric (HOTA, AssA, DetA) [31], IDF1 [32], and MOTA from CLEAR metrics [33]. HOTA is a well-adopted metric that explicitly balances the effects of performing accurate detection and association. IDF1 and AssA are used for association performance evaluation. DetA and MOTA primarily evaluate detection performance. Since the ultimate goal of a motion predictor in MOT is to 12 improve the association step, the improvements in HOTA, IDF1, and AssA are more significant. 

## 5.3 Experimental Procedure 

Fig. 3 : The detail of our experimental procedure Our experimental procedure, illustrated in Figure 3, follows a comprehensive sequence of data preparation, data augmentation, model training, and performance analysis. 

• Data Preparation . The initial stage of the experimental procedure involves preparing the data for model training. This process follows our previously defined problem in Section 3.1: bounding boxes BT are first used to calculate motion infor-mation MT , then BT and MT are concatenated (column-wise) to form CT . This calculation is done for every boxes in every batch. The output of this stage is a structured context information Cm ready for augmentation. 

• Data Augmentation . The prepared data is then subjected to a series of stochastic data augmentation techniques. These augmentations are crucial for improving the model’s robustness and generalization ability. The detail information of our data augmentation process is discussed in Section 4.5 

• Model Train . The augmented dataset and the train groundtruth (the real object’s motion) are used as input for the model training phase. Following this iterative process, the trained model is utilized to conduct a performance analysis. 

• Performance Analysis . The final stage involves a thorough performance analysis of the trained model. The model’s motion prediction ability is evaluated on test sets on standard multi-object tracking metrics, including HOTA, MOTA, IDF1, AssA, and DetA. These metrics quantify different aspects of tracking performance, includ-ing detection accuracy, identity preservation, and association accuracy. Finally, a comparative analysis compares the model’s performance against other state-of-the-art methods on the same benchmark datasets. This provides a comprehensive assessment of the model’s effectiveness. 13 5.4 Implementation Details 

We primarily focus on developing a motion model for tracking objects; thus, for a fair comparison, we use the publicly available YOLOX detector weights provided by ByteTrack [16], DanceTrack [34] and SportsMOT [35] to detect objects in the MOT, DanceTrack and SportsMOT datasets, respectively. The detailed design of our proposed model is shown in Table 1. Our baseline uses a stack of K = 2; each block contains L = 4 layer of dilated convolution layers, where the dilation factor is doubled at each layer; specifically, the dilation factors are [1 , 2, 4]. All layers use 64 2 × 2 filter. We utilize layer normalization [36] and weight normalization [37] techniques to stabilize training. In all experiments, we use a batch size of 1024, Adam optimization technique [38] with β1 = 0 .9, β2 = 0 .999, and learning rate of 2 .5e−4 with no weight decay. For the association stage, we adopt the BYTE association method, which performs separate matching for high-scoring and low-scoring boxes. The high threshold τhigh =0.6 and the low threshold τlow = 0 .4. We only use appearance similarity in the first association. The detailed algorithm and further discussion about the association stage are in Appendix A. 

## 5.5 Benchmark Evaluation 

5.5.1 DanceTrack 

To evaluate TCMP under challenging non-linear object motion, we report results on the DanceTrack in Table 2. Our proposed method significantly improves upon the previous best method, DiffMOT, in several key metrics: HOTA increases from 62.3% to 63.4%, IDF1 rises from 63.0% to 65.0%, and AssA improves from 47.2% to 49.1%. As shown in Table 2, TCMP not only surpasses the recent DiffMOT but also achieves substantial gains over widely-used trackers such as ByteTrack (+16.1% HOTA) and SORT (+15.5% HOTA). Significantly, TCMP achieves these gains in accuracy while maintaining exceptional efficiency, as it is only 0.014 times the size (in terms of parameters) and requires only 0.05 times the computational cost (in terms of FLOPs) compared to DiffMOT. This combination of high accuracy and low computational overhead demonstrates TCMP’s effectiveness and practicality for real-world applications involving complex object motion. See Figure B1 for qualitative results. Furthermore, as detailed in our ablation study (Section 5.6.3), our approach sig-nificantly outperforms classic baselines, such as the Kalman Filter and simple IoU matching, demonstrating the value of our learned non-linear motion model. 

5.5.2 SportsMOT 

Results on SportsMOT are shown in Table 3. SportsMOT is another challenging dataset specifically designed to evaluate tracking performance under conditions of fre-quent and complex non-linear motion in sports. In SportsMOT, there are two settings for testing performance, each utilizing a different detector. 14 Table 1 : Detail layers design of our TCMP proposed architecture. m

is the context Cm’s length, K is the number of block, L is the number of layer                                                                                                                         

> Layer Type Input Shape Output Shape Input
> Input Conv Conv1d 8×m64 ×m
> Layer Norm LayerNorm 64 ×m64 ×m
> ReLU ReLU 64 ×m64 ×m
> Dropout Dropout ( p= 0 .2) 64 ×m64 ×m
> Layer
> (K×L= 8) Layer i
> Stacked Dilated Conv1d 64 ×m64 ×m
> Residual Connection 64 ×m64 ×m
> Skip Connection 64 ×m64 ×m
> ”Filter” Conv 64 ×m64 ×m
> ”Gate” Conv 64 ×m64 ×m
> LayerNorm 64 ×m64 ×m
> ReLU 64 ×m64 ×m
> Dropout ( p= 0 .2) 64 ×m64 ×m
> Regression Head
> ReLU ReLU 64 ×m64 ×m
> Output Conv 1 Conv1d 64 ×m64 ×m
> ReLU ReLU 64 ×m64 ×m
> Output Conv 2 Conv1d 64 ×m4×m
> GAP Global Average Pooling 4×m4×1

In the first setting (using a detector trained only on the SportsMOT train set), TCMP achieves a HOTA score of 73.3%, an IDF1 score of 74.2%, and an AssA score of 62.6%. Compared to previous SOTA, TCMP improves HOTA by 1.2 percentage points (from 72.1% to 73.3%), IDF1 by 1.4 percentage points (from 72.8% to 74.2%), and AssA by 2.1 percentage points (from 60.5% to 62.6%). Compared more broadly against other methods evaluated under this setting (Table 3), TCMP not only surpasses the prior state-of-the-art DiffMOT but also demonstrates notable advantages over other competitive trackers like OC-SORT, BOT-SORT, and ByteTrack, particularly showcasing superior performance in the cru-cial association metrics HOTA, IDF1 and AssA. This highlights TCMP’s effectiveness in handling the complex sports scenarios even with this detector setup. Since the goal of a motion predictor in MOT is to improve the association step, the improvements in HOTA, IDF1, and AssA are more significant. 15 Table 2: Comparison of the state-of-the-art trackers on Dance-Track test set. All trackers are trained without extra training data. Trackers in the blue block share the same detections. ↑ means the higher the better. Bold numbers indicate the best result.                                                                                                     

> Tracker HOTA ↑IDF1 ↑AssA ↑MOTA ↑DetA ↑
> FairMOT [15] 39.7 40.8 23.8 82.2 66.7 CenterTrack [39] 41.8 35.7 22.6 86.8 78.1 TraDes [40] 43.3 41.2 25.4 86.2 74.5 TransTrack [27] 45.5 45.2 27.5 88.4 75.9 QDTrack [41] 45.7 44.8 29.2 83.0 72.1 DiffusionTrack [42] 52.4 47.5 33.5 89.5 82.2 MOTR [28] 54.2 51.5 40.2 79.7 73.5 DeepSORT [14] 45.6 47.9 29.7 87.8 71.0 ByteTrack [16] 47.3 52.5 31.4 89.5 71.6 SORT [13] 47.9 50.8 31.2 91.8 72.0 OC-SORT [9] 55.1 54.2 38.0 89.4 80.3 StrongSORT [43] 55.6 55.2 38.6 91.1 80.7 SparseTrack [44] 55.5 58.3 39.1 91.3 78.9 MotionTrack [7] 58.2 58.6 41.7 91.3 81.4 C-BIoU [45] 60.6 61.6 45.4 91.6 81.3 Deep OC-SORT [9] 61.3 61.5 45.8 92.3 82.2 DiffMOT [5] 62.3 63.0 47.2 92.8 82.5
> Ours 63.4 65.0 49.1 92.0 82.0

TCMP continues to demonstrate strong performance under the second setting (using a detector trained on the SportsMOT train and val sets). TCMP firmly out-performed all other motion-based trackers. It achieves state-of-the-art results with 76.3% HOTA, 76.5% IDF1, and 65.3% AssA. This performance not only surpasses the previous SOTA method, DiffMOT, across all key metrics (HOTA +0.1, IDF1 +0.4, AssA +0.2), but also significantly outperforms other widely-recognized methods like ByteTrack, BoTSORT, and OC-SORT by a substantial margin. The consistent improvements show TCMP’s superior ability to predict objects’ motion with complex, non-linear scenarios, even under the variations present between the two SportsMOT settings. 

## 5.6 Ablation Studies 

We conduct a rigorous series of experiments (ablation studies) on the validation set of DanceTrack with the same YOLOX-X detector throughout all experiments to ensure the consistency. In general, the ablation studies highlight the importance of both the skipped connections and the final block output in the TCMP architecture, with the parameterized α effectively balancing their contributions (Section 5.6.1). The nature of the temporal convolutional network makes it work with arbitrary length context length, and from detailed experiments, we discover that TCMP works best on con-text length up to 16; longer context only adds outdated information and does not improve the performance (Section 5.6.2). On comparing with other Motion models, our proposed TCMP outperforms other methods by a significant margin, illustrating 16 Table 3 : Comparison of the state-of-the-art trackers on SportsMOT test set. Trackers in the blue block share the same detections. Track-ers with * indicate that their detectors are trained on SportsMOT train and val sets. ↑ means the higher the better. Bold numbers indicate the best result.                                                                                                

> Tracker HOTA ↑IDF1 ↑AssA ↑MOTA ↑DetA ↑
> FairMOT [15] 49.3 53.5 34.7 86.4 70.2 GTR [46] 54.5 55.8 45.9 67.9 64.8 QDTrack [41] 60.4 62.3 47.2 90.1 77.5 CenterTrack [39] 62.7 60.0 48.0 90.8 82.1 TransTrack [27] 68.9 71.5 57.5 92.6 82.7 ByteTrack [16] 62.8 69.8 51.2 94.1 77.1 BoT-SORT [22] 68.7 70.0 55.9 94.5 84.4 OC-SORT [9] 71.9 72.2 59.8 94.5 86.4
> DiffMOT [5] 72.1 72.8 60.5 94.5 86.0 Ours 73.3 74.2 62.6 94.1 86.0 ByteTrack* [16] 64.1 71.4 52.3 95.9 78.5 MixSort-Byte* [35] 65.7 74.1 54.8 96.2 78.8 OC-SORT* [9] 73.7 74.0 61.5 96.5 88.5 MotionTrack* [7] 74.0 74.0 61.7 96.6 88.8 MixSort-OC* [35] 74.1 74.4 62.0 96.5 88.5 DiffMOT* [5] 76.2 76.1 65.1 97.1 89.3
> Ours* 76.3 76.5 65.3 96.8 89.2

the robustness of the proposed methods (Section 5.6.3). While achieving state-of-the-art performance, our proposed TCMP, compared to the prior SOTA method, is only 0.014 times the parameter size and 0 .05 times the computational cost (Section 5.6.4). Finally, TCMP maintains high performance when trained and tested on different datasets, indicating its ability to generalize well on different scenarios (Section 5.6.5). 

5.6.1 Impact of the parameterized α

To further understand and prove the influence of the parameterized α, we assess the regression performance under a detailed ablation study with three distinct configurations of our model’s architecture: 1. Using only the parameterized skipped connections ( ˆz only) . In this setup, the regression head utilizes information solely from the parameterized skipped con-nections, bypassing the contribution of the TCN’s final output. This configuration isolates the impact of features directly passed through the skipped connections, emphasizing the raw and early-stage temporal information. 2. Using only the output from the final block ( zK only) . We examine the performance when the regression head relies entirely on the processed features from the TCN’s final block, zK . This setup allows us to analyze the significance of the deeper, hierarchically structured features extracted by the TCN, which capture the refined temporal patterns over the sequence. 3. Using a weighted combination of both ( αˆz + (1 − α)zK ). In the most com-prehensive configuration, both the skipped connections and the final block output 17 Table 4 : Ablation study results for the parameterized α. The table compares regression performance when using only skipped connec-tions, only the final block output, and their weighted combination, demonstrating the impact of α on the model’s effectiveness.                               

> Configuration HOTA ↑IDF1 ↑AssA ↑MOTA ↑DetA ↑
> zKonly 58.3 58.7 43.2 89.9 79.1 ˆzonly 57.7 58.0 42.2 89.7 79.3
> αz K+ (1 −α)ˆ z58.8 60.0 43.9 90.0 79.2

Table 5 : Ablation study results for different context length.                                              

> Context length
> mHOTA ↑IDF1 ↑AssA ↑MOTA ↑DetA ↑
> m≤457.0 57.5 41.3 89.8 79.2
> m≤857.3 58.0 41.9 89.8 78.8
> m≤16 58.8 60.0 43.9 90.0 79.2
> m≤24 58.6 58.0 43.6 89.9 79.5
> m≤32 57.8 57.5 42.2 89.8 79.4

are combined using a weighted parameter α to control their relative contributions. This approach leverages both early-stage and refined features, creating a synergy between them. The results of these experiments are presented in Table 4. The outcomes reveal that both zK and ˆ z contribute valuable information for motion prediction. Precisely, 

zK captures global temporal dependencies and refined patterns that are critical for accurate motion modeling, while ˆ z retains localized and raw temporal information that can complement the final output. The weighted combination controlled by α

demonstrates the best performance, proving that the contribution of α in our design is significant and necessary. 

5.6.2 Impact of different Context lengths 

Although our model can work with arbitrary length of input context, we are curious how our model performs on different context lengths. We perform the experiments by limiting our model to work with context lengths up to a certain number. The results are shown in Table 5. The results from this ablation study explain why our model is constrained on a fixed max context length of m = 16. As shown in Table 5, as the context length increases beyond a certain point, the performance of the model begins to plateau. The minor differences in the results suggest that TCMP can effectively capture relevant information on a wide range of context lengths, and there is an optimal max context length that motion predictors work best on, empirically, m = 16. While longer contexts might contain richer information, they also introduce challenges such as increased computational requirements and potential information 18 Table 6 : Comparison of different motion models on the Dance-Track validation sets. The best results are shown in bold .                                        

> Method HOTA ↑IDF1 ↑AssA ↑MOTA ↑DetA ↑
> IoU only 44.7 36.8 25.3 87.3 79.6
> Kalman Filter 46.8 52.1 31.3 87.5 70.2 LSTM 51.2 51.6 34.3 87.1 76.7 Transformer 54.6 54.6 38.1 89.2 78.6 Diffision 55.7 55.2 39.5 89.3 78.9 TCN (Ours) 58.8 60.0 43.9 90.0 79.2

overload, which can lead to diminished performance. In addition, the motion in Dance-Track and SportsMOT are highly complex, and the changes in motion in each frame are subtle and fast; longer contexts, as a result, may not contain relevant information. Our findings indicate that while the capability to work with arbitrary context length is advantageous, a fixed maximum context length can yield consistent and reliable performance. 

5.6.3 Different motion models 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed motion model in non-linear motion sce-narios, we conducted experiments comparing it with various existing motion models; the results are shown in Table 6. We compare various baseline models, including no motion model (IoU only), the linear Kalman Filter (KF), and non-linear motion mod-els, namely LSTM, Transformer-based and diffusion-based approaches. Our method consistently outperforms others, achieving the highest scores: 58.8% in HOTA, 60.0% in IDF1, 43.9% in AssA, 90.0% in MOTA, and 79.2% in DetA. This result highlights the robustness of our designed TCN in non-linear motion predictions, as it directly learns the distribution of all objects’ motions across the dataset rather than focus-ing on individual trajectories. Compared to the Diffusion-based method, our model delivers up to 3.1% and 4.8% improvements in HOTA and IDF1, respectively. These results, along with results in Table 2, underscore the capability of our model to deal with complex motion scenarios. 

5.6.4 The number of Parameters and FLOPs 

Table 7 shows the comparison of our proposed motion model with prior state-of-the-art motion models, D 2MP, in terms of parameters, FLOPs, and HOTA scores on the DanceTrack and SportsMOT datasets. FLOPs is calculated with X ∈ R1×5×8,representing batch size, context length M and context size (Equation 2), respectively. TCMP achieves a significant reduction in both parameters (0.207M) and FLOPs (1.526M), which is 0 .014 times the size and 0 .05 times the computational cost of D 2MP. Despite its simplicity, our method achieves the highest HOTA scores on both datasets, surpassing D 2MP by +1 .1% on DanceTrack and a slight +0 .1% on SportsMOT. These results highlight the model’s ability to maintain state-of-the-art performance while significantly reducing computational complexity, setting a new standard for efficient and accurate multi-object tracking. 19 Table 7: Comparison of the number of model’s parameters (# Params) and Floating Point Operations (FLOPs), with the corresponding HOTA on DanceTrack (details in Table 2) and SportsMOT (details in Table 3).               

> Tracker # Params FLOPs ↓HOTA ↑
> DanceTrack
> HOTA ↑
> SportsMOT
> D2MP [5] 14.7M 28.0M 62.3 76.2 TCMP (Our) 0.2M 1.5M 63.4 76.3

Table 8 : Generalization experiment of TCMP.                                  

> Test Train HOTA ↑IDF1 ↑AssA ↑MOTA ↑DetA ↑
> DanceTrack DanceTrack 58.8 60.0 43.9 90.0 79.2 SportsMOT 58.3 58.7 43.2 89.9 79.1 SportsMOT SportsMOT 83.4 83.1 74.2 98.5 93.8 DanceTrack 82.0 81.3 72.1 97.9 93.4

5.6.5 Generalization of TCMP 

We systematically train and test TCMP on 2 datasets: DanceTrack, and SportsMOT. We train our model on the train set of each dataset and test it on the validation set. The generalization ability of TCMP is shown in Table 8. When trained and tested on the same dataset, which means that the data come from the same distribution, TCMP undoubtedly achieves competitive performance, demonstrating its effectiveness in cap-turing motion patterns native to the training data. TCMP achieves a HOTA score of 58 .8% on DanceTrack and 83 .4% on SportsMOT when trained on their respective datasets. On cross-dataset evaluations, our proposed TCMP maintains robust performance overall. The models trained on SportsMOT and tested on DanceTrack and vice versa have a minimal drop in HOTA, demonstrating TCMP’s capability to work with unseen data and, thus, generalize well. 

# 6 Conclusion 

Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to identify and track individual objects across video frames. A crucial component of any MOT system is Motion prediction: forecasting future object positions based on past movement. While linear motion (constant speed and direction) is readily predicted using methods like the Kalman Filter, non-linear motion—characterized by sudden stops, accelerations, and turns—presents a signifi-cant challenge. Accurately predicting such non-linearities is vital for robust tracking in dynamic environments, but remains a difficult, open problem. Addressing this non-linear motion challenge is essential to advance MOT and enable its reliable use in real-world applications. 20 This paper addressed the critical challenge of non-linear motion prediction in multi-object tracking (MOT). This problem significantly limits the performance of many existing tracking systems in real-world scenarios. We introduced the Temporal Convolutional Motion Predictor (TCMP), a novel framework leveraging a modified Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) to efficiently and accurately model complex object trajectories. Unlike traditional methods that rely on linear motion assumptions (like the Kalman Filter) or computationally expensive autoregressive models, TCMP directly addresses the causality of motion prediction in online MOT, focusing on one-step-ahead forecasting to avoid cumulative errors. By generating these more accurate motion priors, TCMP is designed to significantly enhance the performance of the data association modules used in complete MOT frameworks. Through comprehensive experiments on challenging benchmarks, including Dance-Track and SportsMOT, which feature highly non-linear and unpredictable object motion, we demonstrated that TCMP achieves state-of-the-art performance. Specif-ically, TCMP significantly improves upon previous methods in key metrics such as HOTA, IDF1, and AssA, demonstrating superior tracking accuracy, identity preser-vation, and association accuracy. Crucially, these improvements are achieved with a remarkably lightweight model – TCMP has a fraction of the parameters and compu-tational cost of the prior state-of-the-art approach. This combination of high accuracy and efficiency underscores TCMP’s capability for practical deployment in resource-constrained applications such as autonomous driving, surveillance, and robotics, where real-time performance is essential. Furthermore, comprehensive experiments on diverse benchmarks (DanceTrack, SportsMOT) demonstrate our model’s superior performance in handling challenging scenarios. 

# Data Availability 

The datasets analyzed during the current study are publicly available in the following repositories and can be accessed via the provided persistent identifiers (PIDs): 

• DanceTrack Dataset . The DanceTrack benchmark dataset is pub-licly available in the official Github repository and can be accessed at https://github.com/DanceTrack/DanceTrack. This dataset was used to generate results in Section 5.5, Section B.1, Table 2, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6, Table 7, and Table 8. 

• SportsMOT Dataset . The SportsMOT benchmark dataset is publicly available in the official Github repository and can be accessed at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/SportsMOT. This dataset was used to generate results in Section 5.5, Section B.2, Table 3, Table 7, and Table 8. 

# Code Availability 

The source code used to generate the results presented in this study is publicly available on GitHub at https://github.com/tcmp-tcn/tcmp. 21 Appendix A Pseudo-code of TCMP 

The pseudo-code of TCMP is shown in Algorithm 1. The input is a video sequence 

V , and an object detector Det , and a detection score thresholds τhigh and τlow . The output is the tracks T of the video, with each track Ti containing the bounding box 

Bi = ( x, y, w, h ) and identity i of the object in each frame. For each frame in the video, we predict the detection boxes and scores using the detector Det . The detection boxes are separated into two Dhigh and Dlow based on the detection score thresholds τhigh and τlow we set earlier. For the detection boxes with scores higher than τ , we put them into the high score detection boxes Dhigh . and the detection boxes within τhigh and τlow is put into Dlow (line 5 to 13 in Algorithm 1). After separating the low-score detection boxes and the high-score detection boxes, TCMP M will perform motion prediction to predict the current position of each track in T in the current frame (lines 14 to 16 in Algorithm 1). The first association is performed between the high score detection boxes Dhigh 

and all the tracks T using the fusion of IoU and the Re-ID feature distances between the detection boxes Dhigh and the predicted box of tracks T . Then, the Hungarian Algorithm [47] is used to perform the association step. The unmatched detections are stored in Dremain and the unmatched tracks in Tremain (line 20 and 21 in Algorithm 1). The second association is performed between the low score detection boxes Dlow 

and the remaining tracks Tremain in the same fashion in the first association. The unmatched tracks in Tre-remain (lines 23 to 25 in Algorithm 1). Using IoU alone in the second association is important because the low-score detection boxes usually contain severe occlusion or motion blur, and appearance features are unreliable. Finally, The unmatched tracks will be deleted from the tracks T .

# Appendix B Qualitative Comparison 

## B.1 Qualitative comparison on DanceTrack 

Figure B1 shows some samples on the test set of DanceTrack. These 4 cases present 4 different difficult scenarios in Multi-object Tracking. 

Case 1: Short-Term Missed Detections . Case 1 shows a situation where the detector fails to detect an object, leading to some detections being missed. The motion model must be capable of continuing to predict the object’s movement so that when the object reappears in the next frame, it can be matched to its previous ID. In the sequence shown in Figure B1a, DiffMOT assigns a different ID to the object after a miss-detection (ID146 → ID150). Our model, however, can still correctly predict and assign the correct ID to the previously miss-detected object (Figure B1b). 

Case 2: Long-Term Missed Detections . Case 2 shows a situation similar to Case 1, but the object is missed for a longer duration, during a more severe detec-tion failure. Such scenarios amplify the difficulty in maintaining identity consistency, testing the ability of ”predicting in the dark”, where there is no new observation for feedback. In the sequence shown in Figure B1c, DiffMOT assigns a different ID to the object (ID9 → ID12). In contrast, our model still assigns the correct ID to the object (Figure B1d). 22 (a) Case 1 (D 2MP) (b) Case 1 (Ours)    

> (c) Case 2 (D 2MP) (d) Case 2 (Ours)
> (e) Case 3 (D 2MP) (f) Case 3 (Ours)
> (g) Case 4 (D 2MP) (h) Case 4 (Ours)

Fig. B1 : Qualitative comparison between using D 2MP and TCMP as the motion model on the DanceTrack test set. (a), (c), (e) and (g) represent the results using D2MP as the motion model. (b), (d), (f) and (h) represent the results using TCMP as the motion model. Each pair of rows shows the comparison of the results for one sequence. Boxes of the same color and number represent the same ID. Best viewed in color and zoom-in 

Case 3: Severe occlusion with crossing trajectories . Case 3 shows a situation where there is severe occlusion and objects’ trajectories cross each other. Motion models need to ”remember” the direction of each object and predict more precise bounding boxes so that they can be associated correctly in the association step. In Figure B1e, DiffMOT assigns a different ID to the object (ID146 → ID150), while in Figure B1f, TCMP remains correct ID for all objects. 

Case 4: Close overlap with complex motions . Case 4 shows objects are highly close/overlapping and have complex motion. In Figure B1g, DiffMOT assigns an ID of one object to another (ID16 tracks the object on the right side of ID2 and switches 23 (a) Basketball (D 2MP) (b) Basketball (Ours)   

> (c) Football (D 2MP) (d) Football (Ours)
> (e) Volleyball (D 2MP) (f) Volleyball (Ours)

Fig. B2 : Qualitative comparison between using D 2MP and TCMP as the motion model on the SportsMOT test set. (a), (c), and (e) represent the results using D 2MP as the motion model. (b), (d), and (f) represent the results using TCMP as the motion model. Each pair of rows shows the comparison of the results for one sequence. Boxes of the same color and number represent the same ID. Best viewed in color and zoom-in to another object that is on the left of ID2). In contrast, in Figure B1h, TCMP keeps ID217 (the same object as ID16 in Figure B1g) on the same object. 

## B.2 Qualitative comparison on SportsMOT 

Figure B2 shows some samples on the test set of the SportsMOT dataset. Each row represents different sports in the SportMOT datasets, namely Basketball (Figure B2a and Figure B2b), Football (Figure B2c and Figure B2d), and Volleyball (Figure B2e and Figure B2f). 

# References 

[1] Sun, P., Cao, J., Jiang, Y., Yuan, Z., Bai, S., Kitani, K., Luo, P.: Dancetrack: Multi-object tracking in uniform appearance and diverse motion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20993–21002 (2022) [2] Cui, Y., Zeng, C., Zhao, X., Yang, Y., Wu, G., Wang, L.: Sportsmot: A large multi-object tracking dataset in multiple sports scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9921–9931 (2023) [3] Milan, A.: Mot16: A benchmark for multi-object tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.00831 (2016) 24 [4] Dendorfer, P.: Mot20: A benchmark for multi object tracking in crowded scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09003 (2020) [5] Lv, W., Huang, Y., Zhang, N., Lin, R.-S., Han, M., Zeng, D.: DiffMOT: A real-time diffusion-based multiple object tracker with non-linear prediction. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19321–19330 (2024) [6] Chaabane, M., Zhang, P., Beveridge, J.R., O’Hara, S.: Deft: Detection embed-dings for tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02267 (2021) [7] Xiao, C., Cao, Q., Zhong, Y., Lan, L., Zhang, X., Luo, Z., Tao, D.: Motiontrack: Learning motion predictor for multiple object tracking. Neural Networks 179 ,106539 (2024) [8] Zhang, J., Zhou, S., Chang, X., Wan, F., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Huang, D.: Multiple object tracking by flowing and fusing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.11180 (2020) [9] Cao, J., Pang, J., Weng, X., Khirodkar, R., Kitani, K.: Observation-centric sort: Rethinking sort for robust multi-object tracking. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9686–9696 (2023) [10] Cai, Z., Vasconcelos, N.: Cascade r-cnn: Delving into high quality object detec-tion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6154–6162 (2018) [11] Sun, P., Jiang, Y., Xie, E., Shao, W., Yuan, Z., Wang, C., Luo, P.: What makes for end-to-end object detection? In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9934–9944 (2021). PMLR [12] Ge, Z.: Yolox: Exceeding yolo series in 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08430 (2021) [13] Bewley, A., Ge, Z., Ott, L., Ramos, F., Upcroft, B.: Simple online and realtime tracking. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 3464–3468. IEEE, ??? (2016) [14] Wojke, N., Bewley, A., Paulus, D.: Simple online and realtime tracking with a deep association metric. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 3645–3649 (2017). IEEE [15] Zhang, Y., Wang, C., Wang, X., Zeng, W., Liu, W.: FairMOT: On the Fairness of Detection and Re-Identification in Multiple Object Tracking. International Journal of Computer Vision 129 (11), 3069–3087 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11263-021-01513-4 arXiv:2004.01888 [cs] 25 [16] Zhang, Y., Sun, P., Jiang, Y., Yu, D., Weng, F., Yuan, Z., Luo, P., Liu, W., Wang, X.: ByteTrack: Multi-Object Tracking by Associating Every Detection Box. arXiv (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.06864 [17] Zhou, X., Wang, D., Kr¨ ahenb¨ uhl, P.: Objects as points. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07850 (2019) [18] Lu, Z., Rathod, V., Votel, R., Huang, J.: Retinatrack: Online single stage joint detection and tracking. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14668–14678 (2020) [19] Wang, Z., Zheng, L., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Wang, S.: Towards real-time multi-object tracking. In: European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 107–122 (2020). Springer [20] Peng, J., Wang, C., Wan, F., Wu, Y., Wang, Y., Tai, Y., Wang, C., Li, J., Huang, F., Fu, Y.: Chained-tracker: Chaining paired attentive regression results for end-to-end joint multiple-object detection and tracking. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 16, pp. 145–161 (2020). Springer [21] Chen, L., Ai, H., Zhuang, Z., Shang, C.: Real-time multiple people tracking with deeply learned candidate selection and person re-identification. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME), pp. 1–6. IEEE, ??? (2018) [22] Aharon, N., Orfaig, R., Bobrovsky, B.-Z.: BoT-SORT: Robust associations multi-pedestrian tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14651 (2022) arXiv:2206.14651 [23] Milan, A., Rezatofighi, S.H., Dick, A., Reid, I., Schindler, K.: Online multi-target tracking using recurrent neural networks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 31 (2017) [24] Sadeghian, A., Alahi, A., Savarese, S.: Tracking the untrackable: Learning to track multiple cues with long-term dependencies. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 300–311 (2017) [25] Wan, X., Wang, J., Zhou, S.: An online and flexible multi-object tracking frame-work using long short-term memory. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 1230–1238 (2018) [26] Ran, N., Kong, L., Wang, Y., Liu, Q.: A robust multi-athlete tracking algorithm by exploiting discriminant features and long-term dependencies. In: MultiMe-dia Modeling: 25th International Conference, MMM 2019, Thessaloniki, Greece, January 8–11, 2019, Proceedings, Part I 25, pp. 411–423 (2019). Springer [27] Sun, P., Cao, J., Jiang, Y., Zhang, R., Xie, E., Yuan, Z., Wang, C., Luo, 26 P.: Transtrack: Multiple object tracking with transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15460 (2020) [28] Zeng, F., Dong, B., Zhang, Y., Wang, T., Zhang, X., Wei, Y.: MOTR: End-to-End Multiple-Object Tracking with Transformer. In: European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 659–675. Springer, ??? (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.2105.03247 [29] Cai, H., Lan, L., Zhang, J., Zhang, X., Zhan, Y., Luo, Z.: Iouformer: Pseudo-iou prediction with transformer for visual tracking. Neural Networks 170 , 548–563 (2024) [30] Oord, A., Kalchbrenner, N., Espeholt, L., Vinyals, O., Graves, A., et al.: Condi-tional image generation with pixelcnn decoders. Advances in neural information processing systems 29 (2016) [31] Luiten, J., Osep, A., Dendorfer, P., Torr, P., Geiger, A., Leal-Taix´ e, L., Leibe, B.: Hota: A higher order metric for evaluating multi-object tracking. International journal of computer vision 129 , 548–578 (2021) [32] Ristani, E., Solera, F., Zou, R., Cucchiara, R., Tomasi, C.: Performance measures and a data set for multi-target, multi-camera tracking. In: European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 17–35. Springer, ??? (2016) [33] Bernardin, K., Stiefelhagen, R.: Evaluating multiple object tracking performance: The clear mot metrics. EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing 2008 ,1–10 (2008) [34] Sun, P., Cao, J., Jiang, Y., Yuan, Z., Bai, S., Kitani, K., Luo, P.: Dancetrack: Multi-object tracking in uniform appearance and diverse motion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20993–21002 (2022) [35] Cui, Y., Zeng, C., Zhao, X., Yang, Y., Wu, G., Wang, L.: Sportsmot: A large multi-object tracking dataset in multiple sports scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9921–9931 (2023) [36] Ba, J.L.: Layer normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 (2016) [37] Salimans, T., Kingma, D.P.: Weight normalization: A simple reparameterization to accelerate training of deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 29 (2016) [38] Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization (2017). https: //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980 [39] Zhou, X., Koltun, V., Kr¨ ahenb¨ uhl, P.: Tracking objects as points. In: European 27 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 474–490 (2020). Springer [40] Wu, J., Cao, J., Song, L., Wang, Y., Yang, M., Yuan, J.: Track to detect and segment: An online multi-object tracker. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12352–12361 (2021) [41] Fischer, T., Huang, T.E., Pang, J., Qiu, L., Chen, H., Darrell, T., Yu, F.: Qdtrack: Quasi-dense similarity learning for appearance-only multiple object tracking. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2023) [42] Luo, R., Song, Z., Ma, L., Wei, J., Yang, W., Yang, M.: Diffusiontrack: Diffusion model for multi-object tracking. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, pp. 3991–3999 (2024) [43] Du, Y., Zhao, Z., Song, Y., Zhao, Y., Su, F., Gong, T., Meng, H.: Strongsort: Make deepsort great again. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 25 , 8725–8737 (2023) [44] Liu, Z., Wang, X., Wang, C., Liu, W., Bai, X.: Sparsetrack: Multi-object tracking by performing scene decomposition based on pseudo-depth. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology (2025) [45] Yang, F., Odashima, S., Masui, S., Jiang, S.: Hard to track objects with irregu-lar motions and similar appearances? make it easier by buffering the matching space. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 4799–4808 (2023) [46] Zhou, X., Yin, T., Koltun, V., Kr¨ ahenb¨ uhl, P.: Global tracking transformers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8771–8780 (2022) [47] Kuhn, H.W.: The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics quarterly 2(1-2), 83–97 (1955) 28 Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code of TCMP 

Input: A video sequence V ; object detector Det ; detection score thresholds 

τhigh , τ low ; TCN Motion Predictor M;

Output: Tracks T of the video.  

> 1

Initialization: T ← ∅  

> 2

for frame f in V do 

// Detection  

> 3

Df ← D (f ) 

> 4

Dhigh ← ∅ ; Dlow ← ∅  

> 5

for d in Df do  

> 6

if d. conf > τ high then  

> 7

Dhigh ← D high ∪ { d} 

> 8

else  

> 9

if τlow < d. conf < τ high then  

> 10

Dlow ← D low ∪ { d} 

> 11

end  

> 12

end  

> 13

end 

> 14

// Motion Prediction  

> 15

for t in T do  

> 16

t ← M (t) 

> 17

end 

> 18

// First Association  

> 19

Associate T and Dhigh using ReID and IoU  

> 20

Tremain ← remaining tracks from T 

> 21

Dremain ← remaining detections from Dhigh 

> 22

// Second Association  

> 23

Associate Tremain and Dlow using IoU  

> 24

Tre-remain ← remaining tracks from Tremain  

> 25

T ← T \ T re-remain  

> 26

for det in Dremain  

> f

do  

> 27

T ← T ∪ { d} 

> 28

end  

> 29

end  

> 30

return T

29