Title: RadAgent: A tool-using AI agent for stepwise interpretation of chest computed tomography

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15231v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 01:23:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# RadAgent: A tool-using AI agent for stepwise interpretation of chest computed tomography 

Mélanie Roschewitz 1,2,3 , Kenneth Styppa 1,4 , Yitian Tao 1, Jiwoong Sohn 1, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck 5,6 ,Benjamin Gundersen 7, Nicolas Deperrois 7, Christian Bluethgen 5,6 , Julia Vogt 2,3 , Bjoern Menze 7, Farhad Nooralahzadeh 7,8 , Michael Krauthammer 7, and Michael Moor 1,2 

> 1

Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Basel, Switzerland 

> 2

ETH AI Center, Zurich, Switzerland 

> 3

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 

> 4

Faculty of Computer Science and Mathematics, Heidelberg University, Germany 

> 5

Stanford Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine and Imaging, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA 

> 6

Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 

> 7

Department of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 

> 8

Institute of Computer Science, Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Zurich, Switzerland 

Abstract 

Vision-language models (VLM) have markedly advanced AI-driven interpretation and reporting of complex medical imaging, such as computed tomography (CT). Yet, existing methods largely relegate clinicians to passive observers of final outputs, offering no interpretable reasoning trace for them to inspect, validate, or refine. To address this, we introduce RadAgent , a tool-using AI agent that generates CT reports through a stepwise and interpretable process. Each resulting report is accompanied by a fully inspectable trace of intermediate decisions and tool interactions, allowing clinicians to examine how the reported findings are derived. In our exper-iments, we observe that RadAgent improves Chest CT report generation over its 3D VLM counterpart, CT-Chat, across three dimensions. Clinical accuracy improves by 6.0 points (36.4% relative) in macro-F1 and 5.4 points (19.6% relative) in micro-F1. Robustness under adver-sarial conditions improves by 24.7 points (41.9% relative). Furthermore, RadAgent achieves 37.0% in faithfulness, a new capability entirely absent in its 3D VLM counterpart. By structur-ing the interpretation of chest CT as an explicit, tool-augmented and iterative reasoning trace, 

RadAgent brings us closer toward transparent and reliable AI for radiology. 

Introduction 

Despite strong performance in report generation and related tasks, recent 3D vision language models (VLM) 1;2;3;4;5 

still largely produce final reports without revealing how the reported findings were identified, what evidence supported them, or how intermediate observations were integrated into the final conclusion. CT reporting is particularly labor-intensive because clinicians must interpret 3D data slice-by-slice, creating a strong need for automation. However, it is also a high stakes task in which clinicians must be able to inspect and validate the process by which a system arrives at its output. Thus, models generating reports without exposing their reasoning remain blackboxes of limited transparency and trustworthiness. 

1

> arXiv:2604.15231v1 [cs.AI] 16 Apr 2026

Addressing this issue, recent medical agentic systems seek to emulate the inherently multi-step and iterative reasoning process of radiological workflows by leveraging the capabilities of large language (LLM) and VLMs to interact with external tools 6;7 . For the use case of CT report generation, CT-Agent 8 proposes a framework where the planning module simultaneously distributes the visual data to ten specialized reasoning tools, with each tool dedicated to analyzing a specific anatomical region (through pre-defined questions from a curated query pool). The information is then aggregated and refined using past examples to produce the final output. Similarly, specifically targeting CT pulmonary angiography, CTPA-Agent 9 adopts a multi-step setup, where first a classification module identifies 32 abnormalities related to pulmonary embolism, followed by a series of predefined region-specific queries to a predefined VLM, before summarizing the acquired information with a separate rewriting agent. Importantly, these agentic systems are training-free. In this paradigm, the agent policy is determined by the system prompt design, or via pre-defined tool call sequences. However, this comes with inherent limitations. First, it presumes that the LLM determining the agent policy has already incorporated required medical knowledge to design relevant, medically-grounded, and complete diagnosis plans. This assumption may not always hold in practice. For this reason, some have proposed to explicitly ground an agentic diagnosis plan in medical guidelines. This grounding either occurs through pre-defining a precise fixed diagnosis plan 9;8 , or by providing the system access to external medical knowledge sources 10;11 . The training-free paradigm also presumes that the LLM orchestrator is inherently able to correctly leverage tools for the task at hand. This may fail in settings where complex dynamic tool workflows are necessary. As such, training-free agentic systems often struggle with tasks that require a highly detailed understanding of complex tool specifications and constraints 12 , which are frequently encountered in complex clinical environments. Beyond advancements in training reasoning models 13;14;15;16;17;18 , reinforcement learning from verifiable rewards is increasingly used to endow LLMs with robust and complex tool use capabilities. By interacting with external environments under well-designed reward functions, these models can learn to cascade tool calls in order to achieve complex goals, often outperforming supervised fine tuning on hand-crafted instruction data 19;20 . In radiology, this paradigm offers a promising route beyond training-free agentic systems toward agents that are optimized for the specific environments in which they operate. Such agents could acquire domain specific competencies while learning to use specialized tools that support evidence grounded and transparent reasoning in clinical decision making. In this work, we present RadAgent , a radiology agent trained with reinforcement learning (RL) to orchestrate 3D CT analysis in a sequence of coherent reasoning steps and tool calls. We show that training RadAgent enables the automatic discovery of effective tool-use strategies, revealing not only which tools are most useful for a given task, but also how they should be queried to improve report generation. Compared to its underlying 3D VLM counterpart, CT-Chat, RadAgent significantly improves accuracy across both internal and external datasets, while also significantly increasing robustness under adversarial conditions. Additionally, we find RadAgent to unlock a new capability, reaching 37.0% in the faithfulness metric (unnormalized) proposed by Chen et al. 21 , as opposed to 0.0% reached by CT-Chat. More broadly, our results suggest that training clinical agents to reason through explicit and tool-grounded intermediate steps may provide a promising path toward more reliable and interpretable AI systems for radiology. We will release RadAgent publicly at https://rad-agent.github.io/ .

2Generate a 

complete 

report for this 

CT volume 

Requesting 

initial report 

{preliminary findings: 

“pleural effusion ”} 

The tool identified potential 

pleural effusion. I will check this 

finding with the effusion 

segmentation tool, followed by 

slice extraction and slice VQA. 

## …

b. Trace example 

Pleural 

effusion in 

this 2D slice? 

{preliminary findings: 

“pleural effusion ”} 

Pleural effusion confirmed 

by sliceVQA tool. Following 

the checklist, I will now 

check with 3D -VQA tool .

{preliminary 

findings: “pleural 

effusion”, “ lung 

nodule 2mm, lower 

left lobe ”} 

I will check the heart 

for cardiomegaly 

using 3D -VQA tool 

Yes 

{preliminary findings: 

“pleural effusion”, 

“lung nodule 2mm, lower 

left lobe”, “ heart 

normal ”,…} 

I have now gathered 

enough information to 

generate the final report 

Findings: Heart contour and size 

are normal. Left pleural effusion is 

observed. There is no pericardial 

effusion. No occlusive pathology 

was detected in the trachea and 

both main bronchi. There is a 2 

mm diameter nodule in the lower 

left lobe. 

effusion_seg () slice_select () slice_vqa () 

x

Any 

abnormality 

in the lungs? 

Yes, lung 

nodule 2mm 

in the lower 

left lobe 

3Dct_vqa() 

3Dct_vqa() 

classifier() 

Generate a 

complete 

report for this CT 

volume 

Check diagnosis checklist 

Connect to available tools 

> DIAGNOSTIC
> CHECKLIST

{preliminary findings: 

“pleural effusion”} 

Agent loop 

Agent Planning 

Call tool 

Update 

environment 

with tool 

output 

Update 

plan 

User query 

a. Overview 

Organ 

segmentation 

Effusion 

segmentation 

Disease 

classification 

Windowing 2D VQA Slice extraction 

3D VQA 

> Lung
> nodule?

Toolbox 

> ?

Update 

answer 

based on 

tool output 

…

Environment 

Input 

Start 

analysis 

c. Setup 

Agent training Evaluation 

Internal 

evaluation 

CT -RATE 

External 

evaluation 

RadChest -CT 

GRPO with composite reward 

curriculum 

Efficient multi -GPU 

communication & parallel rollouts 

Diagnostic checklist 

LLM proposition 

Clinician review 

Diagnostic checklist 

MCP 

Reward design 

Pathology 

detection 

Tool call 

success 

Abnormality 

detection 

judge 

Tool 

diversity 

Checklist 

adherence 

judge 

Tool sequence 

coherence judge 

> DIAGNOSIS
> CHECKLIST
> DIAGNOSTIC
> CHECKLIST
> CARDIOMEGALY

EFFUSION 

> NODULE
> Impression:
> cardiomegaly.

3D Report 

generation 

I will now start to 

double check the 

report with an overall 

analysis using the 

disease classifier 

report_draft ()  

> Findings:
> Heart contour
> and size are
> normal. Lung
> nodule
> present.

RadAgent 

Scratch Pad Figure 1: Overview of RadAgent. a Given a 3D CT volume and a user query, RadAgent first produces an initial report draft and then enters an agent loop guided by a clinician-inspired diagnostic checklist. At each step, the agent plans the next diagnostic action, selects an appropriate tool from a toolbox, updates its memory with tool outputs, and refines its findings until sufficient evidence is collected for generating the final report. b An illustrative example trace showing how the agent verifies preliminary findings through sequential tool calls and accumulates evidence into a complete report. c Training and evaluation pipeline, including composite reward design, clinician-reviewed checklist construction, GRPO-based agent training, and evaluation on internal and external chest CT benchmarks. 

3Results 

RadAgent 

As presented in Fig. 1a, RadAgent is an RL-trained agent for chest CT report generation, equipped with a structured diagnostic checklist and ten specialized tools supporting various aspects of 3D CT analysis. Given a CT scan, RadAgent first invokes the open source CT-Chat 2 model to produce an initial draft. Starting with this preliminary report, the agent then systematically revisits the study by traversing the checklist item by item to verify initial findings and identify potential omissions. At each step, RadAgent decides which diagnostic question to investigate next and which tool to use for that purpose. Throughout this sequential decision making process, the orchestrating agent maintains a persistent scratchpad of preliminary findings, which is continuously updated as new evidence is gathered. This scratchpad provides a transparent record of how individual observations were established, linking the findings of the final report to the specific tool outcomes that supported them. Once the agent determines that the investigation is complete, it synthesizes all the accumulated evidence into the final report. As such, RadAgent can plan sequential diagnostic strategies, interrogate CT data in a traceable manner, and produce interpretable intermediate outputs. The toolbox available to the agent comprises open source models for CT analysis, including vision-only tools such as organ segmentation, classification, CT windowing, and 2D slice extraction, as well as vision language tools such as 3D and 2D VLMs for question-answering. All tools are available to the agent through Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers 22 . The diagnostic checklist comprises nine categories that are routinely assessed in chest CT interpretation, for example, lung parenchyma assessment, including nodules, masses, focal abnormalities, and diffuse patterns. Further implementation details are provided in the Methods section. 

Datasets and evaluation 

We focus our study on chest CT analysis, using the publicly available CT-RATE 2 as our training, validation and in-distribution test set, complemented by RadChestCT 23 for external evaluation. More details about the datasets can be found in the Methods section. To evaluate the quality of the generated reports, we focus on disease detection metrics computed on automatically extracted pathology labels. For this, we use the labels released with CT-RATE 2. These cover 18 common pathologies identified in the CT-RATE dataset and were released by the authors together with a custom text classifier capable of identifying them in any given report. As such, computing the macro/micro-averaged F1-score on these extracted pathologies has become the most established evaluation metric in CT-RATE-based studies. The RadChestCT 23 dataset includes 82 abnormality labels. For comparability, we again focus on the 18 pathologies identified in the CT-RATE dataset and leverage the same text classifier to evaluate report generation quality. 

Report generation results 

RadAgent combines ten specialized tools for 3D CT analysis with a 14B language agent as a tool-calling and process-orchestrating policy, trained with reinforcement learning using the GRPO algorithm 17 (see Methods). In Fig. 2, we compare the performance of the trained RadAgent with that of CT-Chat 2, which serves within 

RadAgent as a key 3D VLM tool for generating the initial report draft and for further visual question answering. As such, this comparison tests whether RadAgent can transparently refine or correct the initial report produced by this baseline VLM. 

4Figure 2: Report generation quality comparison between the trained RadAgent system and the CT-Chat report generation baseline. A Results on the CT-RATE validation set, B results on the CT-RATE test set, 

C results on RadChestCT, and D per-pathology F1 scores on the CT-RATE test set. The trained RadAgent 

system significantly outperforms the baseline across the validation, test, and external test datasets. On the CT-RATE test set, RadAgent improves macro averaged F1 by +6.0 points and micro averaged F1 by +5.4 points over the baseline, which correspond to 36.4% and 19.6% relative improvement. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals obtained via bootstrapping separately for each system. In A, B, and C, statistically significant differences are marked with asterisks. 

Improving tool-using capabilities with reinforcement learning As shown in Fig. 2, RadAgent significantly outperforms the CT-Chat baseline in the CT-RATE validation set, the CT-RATE test set and the external RadCh-estCT dataset. On the CT-RATE test set, these gains amount to 6.0 and 5.4 percentage points higher macro-F1 and micro-F1 scores, respectively, which correspond to 36.4% and 19.6% relative improvements over the baseline. Examining these results on the pathology-level shows that these performance gains are driven mainly by improved detection of findings that are frequently missed by the baseline, with especially strong improvements for several challenging and low performing pathologies. Similar trends can be observed in both the validation set and the external test set (see Fig. A.1). 

Reward design A crucial contributing factor to the success of this training pipeline is the definition of a suitable reward function. Indeed, RadAgent should not only provide improved report generation capabilities, but also adhere to the provided diagnostic checklist, as well as produce coherent tool call sequences. That is, RadAgent 

should only call the tools that are necessary for its final analysis. For example, calling a segmentation tool without using the produced segmentation map in any subsequent part of the analysis trace is considered incoherent, 

5as it would lead to unnecessary high computational costs at no advantage for the final report. We show that integrating all of these requirements in the reward design is critical to achieving optimal performance. Our final reward consists of a composite reward curriculum designed to carefully balance exploration of new tool sequences, report quality, and tool sequence coherence. The final reward design is detailed in the Methods, RL training of RadAgent subsection. To further shed light on the effect of the composite reward on the final behavior of 

RadAgent , in Fig. A.11, we compare three training paradigms: (i) ‘Mixed reward’ training with the proposed curriculum of composite rewards; (ii) ‘No sequence reward’ training without introducing tool-sequence-oriented rewards ( RtoolJudge ); (iii) ‘Sequence judge from the start’ , training with tool-sequence-oriented rewards from the beginning of training. Results in Fig. A.11, show that without the sequence reward the model collapses to a policy that does not respect the checklist anymore after training and produces more incoherent tool calls. On the other hand, when training with the sequence reward from the start, report quality is traded-off with checklist adherence and tool sequence coherence as the sequence judge penalizes early exploration of more diverse tool call traces. Given these insights, we choose the mixed, curriculum reward as our final reward strategy. Further details, will again be provided in the Method section. 

Training-free results In Fig. A.3, we report the performance of RadAgent without RL-based policy opti-mization. In this setting, the agent has access to the same specialized tool set, system prompt, and diagnostic checklist, but its tool calling policy is not further refined through training. Interestingly, we observe that even without any optimization of its tool-calling policy, the training-free RadAgent already surpasses the CT-Chat baseline interms of macro-F1. Comparison with Fig. 2 further shows that RL yields noticeable gains beyond the training-free alternative, indicating that the benefits of the system arise not only from access to specialized tools, but also from learning to use them effectively. In particular, policy optimization appears to improve out-of-domain generalization. On the external RadChestCT dataset, the CT-Chat baseline first achieves significantly higher micro-F1 than the training-free RadAgent variant. This relationship reverses after reinforcement learning, with the trained RadAgent significantly outperforming CT-Chat. As such, training further emphasizes the strengths of the system by improving its overall performance while also promoting a more robust generalization of these gains. 

Faithfulness and robustness results 

Beyond clinical accuracy, RadAgent introduces an additional level of transparency into automated report gener-ation through its iterative tool-based workflow. The traceability of its decision making process improves not only report quality, but also the faithfulness of model outputs and the robustness of report generation under adversarial prompt perturbations. To evaluate these properties, we performed a controlled hint injection experiment inspired by prior analyses of reasoning behavior in large language models 21 . We randomly sampled 1,000 studies from the CT-RATE test set. For each study, we selected one pathology at random from the corresponding ground truth report and constructed two modified input prompts: one containing a correct hint about that pathology and one containing a flipped, incorrect hint designed to steer the model toward a false conclusion. For instance, given a scan without arterial wall calcification, the prompt Can you generate the report for the following chest CT volume? was modified to Can you generate the report for the following chest CT volume? Hint: I think the scan shows arterial wall calcification . For each case, we additionally stored the original prediction of the system without any injected hint, allowing us to isolate whether a prompt perturbation changed a previously correct answer to an incorrect one or, conversely, changed a previously incorrect answer to a correct one. 

6We define robustness as the ability of a system to preserve an originally correct prediction despite exposure to an incorrect hint. In other words, robustness measures whether the model can recover from misleading guidance and still arrive at the correct conclusion. Faithfulness captures a complementary property. Following recent work 21 ,we ask whether the output of a model accurately reflects the factors that led to its final judgment. In this setting, if an injected hint changes the model’s decision for a given pathology, the result is considered faithful only if the report or its generation process explicitly reflects this influence. By contrast, a unfaithful result presents a seemingly evidence-based justification for the altered finding, while failing to acknowledge that the change was in fact induced by the prompt perturbation. 

Figure 3: Faithfulness and robustness of RadAgent under injected prompt hints. a , Standard CT report generation with a 3D VLM baseline, where the CT volume and instruction are mapped directly to a report through a largely intransparent inference process. b, CT report generation with RadAgent , which adds an agentic diagnostic trajectory that iteratively uses specialized tools and yields a traceable intermediate reasoning process before producing the final report. c, Robustness and faithfulness under injected prompt hints for RadAgent 

and the 3D VLM baseline, CT Chat. RadAgent outperforms CT Chat on robustness (83.7% versus 58.9%) and faithfulness (37.0% versus 0.00%). Error bars indicate 95% bootstrapping confidence intervals. Asterisks mark significant differences at the 5% significance level. In the following, we outline the findings of the hint injection experiment. Firstly, RadAgent improved robustness to false hints by 24.7 percentage points over CT Chat (Fig. 3), indicating RadAgent to be less susceptible to misleading suggestions unsupported by the underlying evidence. We attribute this effect to the integration of intermediate tool outputs and the explicit diagnostic trace, which anchors report generation in verifiable findings and enables false hints to be identified as unsupported. Secondly, RadAgent improved faithfulness by 37.0 percentage points compared to CT Chat (Fig. 3). Notably, CT Chat achieved a faithfulness score of 0.0. Even though its final reports were more influenced by injected hints than those of RadAgent (s. Fig. A.9), this influence was never acknowledged in the generated reports. We interpret this pattern as a limitation of conventional 3D vision language models, which are largely trained to generate reports in a single step and, therefore, do not expose the intermediate factors shaping their outputs. As a result, even though such models may yield high benchmark scores, they are at risk of producing plausible, well phrased reports that appear grounded in image evidence even when their conclusions may have been partially steered by other factors. In contrast, the explicit agent trace in RadAgent enables to distinguish between 

7evidence-supported findings and hint-driven influences. Further details on the robustness and faithfulness metrics, as well as their computation, are included in the Methods section. 

Discussion 

In this work, we present RadAgent , an RL-trained radiology agent for chest CT analysis and report generation. Our results demonstrate its usefulness over standalone 3D VLMs and its training-free alternative on internal and external datasets. RadAgent -based report generation not only improves diagnostic performance, but also produces outputs that are more resistant to misleading contextual cues and therefore more reliable for clinical use. We attribute these improvements mainly to the iterative nature of the learned agentic process, in which an initial report is refined step by step while leveraging multiple specialized tools and key inductive biases encoded in the diagnostic checklist (s. Fig. A.14, Fig. A.13). Compared to conventional 3D VLMs this comes with the critical advantage of anchoring individual decisions directly within the provided evidence, leading to the observed higher levels of robustness and faithfulness. Although the checklist and the tools accessible to the agent were fixed in this study, they can be easily adapted to local guidelines and specific user needs. Together with the increased transparency of intermediate reasoning steps and tool use, this may create new opportunities for effective human-AI collaboration. One can envision a human-in-the-loop workflow in which RadAgent first generates a report using its learned tool calling policy, after which the clinician can directly interrogate and validate the underlying findings within the RadAgent environment, for instance by requesting segmentation of a pleural effusion on the CT volume to visually verify a positive finding. The training phase of RadAgent can be understood as an automated discovery process for an effective tool-use policy. Rather than manually specifying a workflow or relying on extensive trial and error in prompt design and tool selection, our agent learns a high-performing tool calling strategy from the available set of tools. Once this has been learned, it may be possible to distill it into a fixed inference workflow. This could offer computational advantages, for example by prioritizing GPU resources for the most frequently used tools and deactivating redun-dant components. A fixed workflow may also be advantageous in regulatory settings, where system behavior may need to remain stable and be prospectively validated in clinical studies. More broadly, our findings point to a promising direction for medical AI systems that combine a general purpose agent interface with highly specialized diagnostic tools. Many high-performing AI models in medicine remain difficult to deploy broadly as their utility is restricted to narrowly defined tasks, despite excelling within their area of specialization 24 . RadAgent can serve as a flexible front-end that interacts with the complex and multifactorial nature of clinical practice and dynamically routes specific subtasks to the most appropriate tools. In this way, agentic systems may help bridging the longstanding tradeoff between breadth and specialization, by combining the adaptability of more general systems with the precision of expert models. Our results already provide initial evidence for this view, as RadAgent shows particularly strong gains over the VLM baseline on challenging pathologies where access to specialized tools appears especially beneficial. We therefore anticipate that expanding the available tool set will further improve the breadth, coverage, and practical utility of such systems, unlocking capabilities that would not be achievable through either general models or specialized tools alone. In terms of limitations, we note that this system requires a multi GPU setup to host multiple potentially compu-tationally heavy tools, together with the orchestrator model itself. Although some components are only needed during reward computation and can be removed after training, and rarely used tools can be disabled to make inference more efficient, the system may still be too computationally demanding for resource constrained settings. 

8A further limitation is that the trained agent is optimized for the specific tool set available during training and may become suboptimal as the toolbox evolves. However, RadAgent offers the flexibility to rerun the RL pipeline whenever the tool set changes substantially. As such, evolving tools further motivate learned agent policies over hand-crafted, training-free agentic systems. Finally, we note that although RadAgent yields substantial im-provement in faithfulness, the achieved level of 37% clearly leaves substantial room for future work to develop methods for further improvement. 

Methods 

RadAgent implementation 

RadAgent is an agentic system for 3D chest CT analysis, equipped with a diagnostic checklist for report generation, and ten different specialized tools. Report generation with RadAgent follows a ReAct pattern 6.I.e., it is structured as an iterative process in which at each step the agent may decide to call more tools and pursue its investigation or to stop the conversation and provide its final report. Starting from an initial draft obtained by calling a report generation tool, RadAgent follows a user-specific diagnosis checklist to improve the quality of the preliminary, as well as identifying potential omissions. At each turn of the conversation, RadAgent can decide which tool to call to investigate a particular finding, as well as which precise diagnostic question should be investigated at this stage. When the agent deems its investigation sufficient, it concludes the conversation and generates the final report based on all findings collected. The system prompt defining the base capabilities of RadAgent can be found in Fig. A.4. The agent’s main policy model (i.e., the LLM at its core) is, unless specified otherwise, using an instruction-tuned version of the open-source Qwen3-14B model 25 , a temperature of 1.0 and maximum completion tokens per agent turn of 4096. The Qwen family was chosen for its known strong capabilities among the open-source models. The 14B model was chosen for its trade-off between inherent capabilities and training costs for finetuning. Tools are accessible to RadAgent via the MCP protocol 22 , allowing standardized communication between the orchestrator and the various tools across multiple GPUs and nodes (see below). 

RadAgent Toolbox 

The RadAgent Toolbox is a comprehensive suite of MCP packaged tools designed to support agentic reasoning and decision making for CT image diagnosis. It equips RadAgent with structured capabilities across the full radiological workflow, including image understanding, pathology screening, segmentation, slice selection, and report generation. Most of these models require GPU enabled execution. To support this workload, RadAgent 

is deployed across eight GPUs on two nodes. One node hosts the trained agent, while the auxiliary tools are distributed across the four GPUs (Table A.1) of the second node. The tools are grouped by device to maximize GPU utilization. Moreover, the toolbox is designed to be extensible, allowing new tools to be integrated easily as new models or functionalities become available. Below we detail the characteristics of individual tools accessible to RadAgent .

9Figure 4: The RadAgent toolbox. Panel A-I illustrate the individual tools added to the toolbox. 

3D and 2D visual question answering For image understanding and interactive reasoning, the toolbox includes visual question answering tools that enable direct querying of CT data at both volume and slice level. First, we leverage CT-Chat 2 in VQA-mode, as our ct_vqa() tool. This tool accepts a volumetric CT scan together with a free form natural language question and returns a short textual answer. In addition, the toolbox includes a slice level VQA tool (i.e., slice_vqa() ) based on a 2D vision language model. This tool accepts one or more extracted 2D CT images together with a natural language question and returns a single free text answer summarizing the visual evidence across the provided images. It does not support direct reasoning over full 3D CT volumes and, therefore, requires prior slice extraction (i.e., based on Slice Choosing tools). In our study, we used 

google/gemma-3-27b-it 26 as the slice VQA component, as it showed the strongest performance in exploratory experiments. The temperature of the model is set to 0.0 with a maximum generation length of 6,000 tokens. When slice inputs were stored as NumPy arrays, intensities were min max normalized and converted to 8 bit PNG images before inference. 

Disease classification To support automated pathology screening and hypothesis generation, the toolbox pro-vides a disease classification tool (i.e., disease_classifier() ) based on CT-CLIP 2. The tool takes a single volumetric CT scan and analyzes it for eighteen thoracic pathologies (e.g., cardiomegaly, pleural effusion, emphy-sema, consolidation, and bronchiectasis). The classifier is instantiated from the CT-CLIP checkpoint VocabFine .Its output is a serialized set of pathology specific probability estimates. 

10 Report generation For report synthesis, the toolbox includes an automated tool report_generation() for report generation based on the CT-Chat model 2. This tool receives a chest CT volume together with a text prompt and produces a single free text draft report for the entire scan. It is intended for study level report drafting rather than localized reasoning over selected slices or narrowly defined regions. In practice, the report-generation tool is first called to produce an initial draft, which the agent then verifies and refines. 

Segmentation Precise anatomical and pathological localization is enabled through segmentation tools based on TotalSegmentator 27 . First, anatomy_segmentation() is designed to generate volumetric masks for a predefined set of anatomical structures, including among others the liver, spleen, kidneys, lung lobes, heart, aorta, pulmonary vein, trachea, and esophagus. Given a CT volume and a list of requested structures, the tool returns the corresponding segmentation masks as volumetric images in the same spatial reference frame as the input scan. In addition, a dedicated tool for effusion segmentation effusion_segmentation() focuses specifically on pleural and pericardial effusions. Given a CT volume, it produces two volumetric segmentation outputs, one for pleural effusion and one for pericardial effusion, which can be used directly for visualization, representative slice extraction, or downstream reasoning. 

Slice choosing The toolbox includes multiple slice selection tools to extract relevant 2D slices from 3D CT volumes. biggest_slice_selection() takes a CT volume and its corresponding segmentation mask as input and returns axial 2D slices. If the segmented abnormality appears in several separate parts, the tool treats these as separate regions. For each region, it selects the axial slice that contains the highest number of segmented voxels, that is, the slice where the segmented area is largest. Using the same input and an additional integer 

nslices , a second tool get_several_slices_from_segmentation() returns nslices approximately equidistant axial slices for each disconnected segmented region. This allows the agent to capture structural variability and spatial context across the axial extent of elongated or complex findings. In our implementation, the default value was 

nslices = 3 when no task specific value was provided by the agent. Finally, to ensure more flexible slice selection, the 

extract_slices_from_ct() tool directly extracts n evenly spaced slices from the CT volume without requiring a segmentation mask. Depending on the selected viewing direction, these slices may be axial, coronal, or sagittal. The default setting extracts five slices in the axial direction when no task specific parameters are given. This tool provides a simple way to obtain global 2D evidence from the full 3D scan when no prior mask is available. 

Windowing To enhance image interpretability, the toolbox incorporates a CT windowing tool windowing() that applies standard window width and level presets such as lung, bone, abdomen, and mediastinum. Specifically, the preset center and width values are lung (−600 , 1500) , bone (300 , 1500) , abdomen (60 , 350) , and mediastinum 

(50 , 350) . The tool accepts either volumetric CT images in NIfTI format or previously extracted 2D slice arrays. Windowing is implemented by clipping voxel intensities to the selected interval defined by center ± width /2. For slice inputs stored as NumPy arrays, intensities are subsequently normalized to [0 , 1] and saved as 8 bit PNG images suitable for visualization. For volumetric inputs, the tool produces a windowed volumetric image. These windowed outputs can then be inspected directly or passed to downstream slice level reasoning modules such as the VQA tool. 

Diagnostic checklist 

The diagnosis checklist provided to the model can be found in Fig. A.5. The initial draft of this checklist was generated by AI (using Gemini-2.5-Pro ) which was then reviewed and corrected by a radiologist. This 

11 checklist was voluntarily kept short and coarse, to leave the agent the liberty to finetune its policy, without overly pre-defining its course of action. 

Datasets 

CT-RATE dataset 2 contains 25,692 non-contrast 3D chest CT scans and matched radiology reports from 21,304 patients. Each CT study is accompanied by a radiology report, including findings and impression sections, together with additional information such as patient details and scan technique. Although CT-RATE is a single-center dataset, it retains notable diversity in scanner hardware, acquisition settings, and reconstruction strategies. The official dataset release contains an official training set and an official test set. We additionally create an internal validation set for our experiments, consisting of 1,000 scans from the official training split and held-out during RL training. We report metrics on both our internal validation set and the official test set for all experiments. RadChestCT 23 is a large-scale dataset of 36,316 non-contrast chest CT volumes from roughly 20,000 patients, collected at Duke University Health System. Each scan is associated with a radiology report and annotated with 84 abnormality labels and 52 anatomical location labels. Owing to its large scale and substantial heterogeneity in scanner types, acquisition protocols, and reconstruction settings, RadChestCT serves as an important benchmark for volumetric chest CT analysis. Currently, 10% of the full dataset has been released publicly (3,632 scans), we use this publicly available set as our external evaluation set. 

Evaluation metrics Report generation metrics Choosing an appropriate, domain-specific evaluation metric is central to assessing the quality of radiology reports. Several metrics have been proposed and validated for chest X-ray report genera-tion, including CheXBert 28 , RadGraph F1 29 , and GREEN 30 . Nevertheless, the most suitable evaluation strategy for CT report generation remains unsettled. Standard natural language processing metrics such as BLEU 31 and ROUGE 32 are inadequate for this task, as they do not reflect clinically important distinctions such as negation 30 .To address this limitation, Ostmeier et al. 30 introduced GREEN, in which an LLM-based judge extracts findings from both the reference and candidate reports and assigns a score according to the number of matching findings, weighted by clinical severity. In our experiments, however, GREEN exhibited a pronounced length bias. In particular, these metrics do not distinguish between normal and abnormal findings in score computation. Consequently, when a reference report contains many explicitly normal statements, whereas the candidate report concentrates on abnormal findings, the resulting GREEN score may be drastically reduced. We illustrate this effect in Fig. A.2. We consider this behavior undesirable. In radiological reporting, the absence of a statement about a specific pathology is generally interpreted as indicating that the pathology was not observed and that the corresponding region is unremarkable. More importantly, assigning equal weight to normal and abnormal findings can obscure clinically meaningful errors: a templated report listing many normal findings may achieve a favourable score despite failing to identify the salient abnormalities. Since abnormal findings are typically far fewer than the large number of potentially normal observations, aggregate performance trends can therefore be dominated by the reporting of normality rather than by the detection of disease. By contrast, the authors of CT-RATE 2 provide multilabel annotations for the 18 most common pathologies described in the corresponding radiology reports, together with a custom text classifier for extracting these labels from generated reports. Macro and micro averaged F1 scores over these extracted pathologies have therefore 

12 become the most widely used evaluation metrics in CT-RATE-based studies. This approach focuses explicitly on common pathologies, provides a readily transferable evaluation protocol, and may be less susceptible to noise than alternative LLM as judge based metrics. Therefore, we report F1 scores computed with this classifier, together with 95% bootstrapping confidence intervals. To measure significant differences, we employ two-sided permutation tests at the 5% significance level. 

Robustness and faithfulness metrics Robustness and faithfulness were quantified using the hint injection setup described in the Results section. For each evaluated system, we compared predictions obtained from the original prompt with predictions obtained after injecting either a correct or an incorrect hint about a pathology randomly selected from the corresponding ground truth report. We defined robustness as the conditional probability 

R = P (ˆy wrong = y∗ ∣∣ ˆy orig = y∗),

where y∗ denotes the ground truth label for the referenced pathology, ˆy orig denotes the system prediction in the unhinted setting, and ˆy wrong denotes the prediction obtained after injection of an incorrect hint. In practice, robustness was estimated empirically as 

ˆR =

∑ 

> i

1

[

ˆy orig  

> i

= y∗ 

> i

∧ ˆy wrong  

> i

= y∗

> i

]∑ 

> i

1

[

ˆy orig  

> i

= y∗

> i

] ,

where the sum runs over all cases evaluated with an incorrect hint, and 1[·] denotes the indicator function. The denominator counts all cases for which the system prediction was correct in the unhinted setting, and the numerator counts the subset of these cases for which the prediction remained correct after injection of the incorrect hint. We adopt the faithfulness definition proposed by Chen et al. 21 as the conditional probability 

F = P (A = 1 ∣∣ ˆy h̸ = ˆ y orig , ˆy h = h),

where ˆy h denotes the prediction obtained after injection of a hint, h ∈ { correct , wrong } denotes the label implied by the injected hint, and A ∈ { 0, 1} indicates whether the report generation process explicitly acknowledges the hint’s influence (1) or not (0). Hint acknowledgement was identified by Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 

in FP8 using a temperature of 0.7. To assess label reliability, we relabeled a random subset of hint-following cases using gpt-5.4-mini-2026-03-17 with a temperature of 0.0, sampling up to 100 instances per Qwen-based label where available. This yielded only Qwen-negative cases for CT-Chat, and 100 Qwen-negative plus 61 Qwen-positive cases for RadAgent . Treating the GPT-based labels as ground truth, Qwen-based la-bels achieved an accuracy of 0.91 in RadAgent cases and 1.00 in CT-Chat cases. These results support 

Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 as a reliable open-source labeler for hint admission. Nevertheless, given that labeling is not perfect, we conservatively treat estimated faithfulness scores as upper bounds on the true faithful-ness. The prompt used for hint-admission labeling can be found in A.8. Faithfulness was empirically estimated as 

ˆF =

∑ 

> i

1

[

ˆy hi̸ = ˆ y orig  

> i

∧ ˆy hi = hi ∧ Ai = 1 

]∑ 

> i

1

[

ˆy hi̸ = ˆ y orig  

> i

∧ ˆy hi = hi

] ,

where the sum runs over all cases evaluated with either a correct or an incorrect hint. The denominator counts all cases in which the injected hint changed the system prediction relative to the unhinted setting with the final 

13 prediction matching the hinted content. The numerator counts the subset of these cases in which the report generation process explicitly acknowledged the hint. Both empirical metrics, ˆR and ˆF , range from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating better performance. 

RL training of RadAgent Training pipeline To train RadAgent , we use the GRPO algorithm 17 , with rewards as described below. Specifically, we perform LoRA 33 finetuning of our base model (Qwen3-14B 25 ) with rank 16 and alpha 32 on 8 GH200 GPUs. The model was trained with 8 rollouts for each training example, using a batch size of 6 examples and a learning rate of 0.00001 for 150 steps, time at which the model had converged to a point where the validation metrics were no longer improving. 

Reward design Training RadAgent with GRPO requires a reward that balances two objectives: generating high quality radiology reports and using tools in a reliable, efficient, and clinically meaningful manner. We therefore define a composite reward consisting of one report quality term and four tool use terms. To reward report quality, we build on the F1 scores computed by the CT-RATE text classifier, hereforth denoted as F1 18 . We complement this metric with a second quality score that captures agreement on abnormal findings 

F 1abnorm . For computing it, we first use the reasoning model Qwen3-30B-A3B-Thinking 25 to extract abnormal findings from both the candidate report and the ground truth report. The model is then asked to determine, for each finding, whether it is fully matched, partially matched, or missed, where a partial match corresponds to a case in which the pathology is correct but an attribute such as location is incorrect. The full prompt is given in Fig. A.7. To improve robustness, we perform a second pass with the same reasoning model, prompted to review and correct the initial judgment. If we denote by C the number of abnormal findings extracted from the candidate report and by G the number of abnormal findings extracted from the ground truth report, and further denote by MC and PC the numbers of candidate findings that are fully and partially matched in the ground truth, respectively, then the abnormality precision is defined as Prec abnorm = MC + 0 .5 PC

C .

Analogously, if MG and PG denote the numbers of ground truth findings that are fully and partially matched in the candidate report, respectively, then the abnormality recall is Rec abnorm = MG + 0 .5 PG

G .

The factor 0.5 assigns partial credit to partially matched findings. We then define the abnormality F1 score as: F1 abnorm = 2 Prec abnorm Rec abnorm 

Prec abnorm + Rec abnorm 

.

We then define our total report quality reward as the sum of both F1 scores: 

Rquality = F1 18 + F1 abnorm .

The remaining terms quantify the quality of the tool use trajectory. First, we measure tool success . If Ncall 

denotes the total number of tool calls in a trajectory and Nsucc the number of tool calls that execute successfully, then 

Rsucc = Nsucc 

Ncall 

.

14 Second, we reward tool diversity . If Nused denotes the number of distinct tools used at least once in the trajectory and Navail the total number of available tools, then 

Rdiv = Nused 

Navail 

.

Third, we measure tool graph coherence . We construct the graph induced by the tool calls and count how many calls either produce text directly useful for the final report represented as leaf nodes in the tool-call-graph or produce an object that is consumed by a later tool call. If this number is denoted by Ncoh , then 

Rcoh = Ncoh 

Ncall 

.

Finally, to encourage adherence to the provided checklist while discouraging unnecessarily long or computationally heavy trajectories, we introduce a separate LLM-based judge, whose prompt is given in Fig. A.6. This judge outputs a checklist adherence score Schk ∈ { 1, . . . , 5} and a tool sequence coherence score Sseq ∈ { 1, . . . , 5}.We combine both as 

RtoolJudge = Schk 

5 + Sseq 

5 .

The final reward is scheduled in two phases. During the first 90 training steps, we use 

Rearly = Rquality + 0 .5 Rdiv + 0 .5 Rcoh + 0 .1 Rsucc .

This encourages relatively free exploration of the policy space. However, after sufficient training, the model may begin to ignore the prescribed checklist if not further constrained. We therefore switch, after 90 steps, to a reward that places less emphasis on diversity and more emphasis on coherence and checklist adherence: 

Rlate = Rquality + 0 .2 Rdiv + 0 .2 Rcoh + 0 .1 Rsucc + 0 .2 RtoolJudge .

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported as part of the Swiss AI Initiative by a grant from the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS) under project ID a135 on Alps. 

References 

[1] Bai, F., Du, Y., Huang, T., Meng, M. Q.-H. & Zhao, B. M3d: Advancing 3d medical image analysis with multi-modal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00578 (2024). [2] Hamamci, I. E. et al. Generalist foundation models from a multimodal dataset for 3d computed tomography. 

Nature Biomedical Engineering (2026). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01599-y .[3] Wu, C. et al. Towards generalist foundation model for radiology by leveraging web-scale 2d&3d medical data. Nature Communications 16 , 7866 (2025). [4] Shui, Z. et al. Large-scale and fine-grained vision-language pre-training for enhanced ct image understanding. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025). [5] Blankemeier, L. et al. Merlin: a computed tomography vision–language foundation model and dataset. 

Nature 1–11 (2026). 

15 [6] Yao, S. et al. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations (2022). [7] Fallahpour, A., Ma, J., Munim, A., Lyu, H. & Wang, B. Medrax: Medical reasoning agent for chest x-ray. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 15661–15676 (PMLR, 2025). [8] Mao, Y., Xu, W., Qin, Y. & Gao, Y. Ct-agent: A multimodal-llm agent for 3d ct radiology question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16229 (2025). [9] Zhong, Z. et al. Vision-language model for report generation and outcome prediction in ct pulmonary angiogram. NPJ Digital Medicine 8, 432 (2025). [10] Wang, Z. et al. Medagent-pro: Towards evidence-based multi-modal medical diagnosis via reasoning agentic workflow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18968 (2025). [11] Li, S. et al. A co-evolving agentic ai system for medical imaging analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20279 

(2025). [12] Qi, Y. et al. AGENTIF: Benchmarking large language models instruction following ability in agentic scenarios. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (2025). URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FLiMxTkIeu .[13] Gu, B. et al. Clinical-r1: Empowering large language models for faithful and comprehensive reasoning with clinical objective relative policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.00601 (2025). [14] Wang, P., Ye, S., Naseem, U. & Kim, J. Mrg-r1: Reinforcement learning for clinically aligned medical report generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16145 (2025). [15] Gundersen, B. et al. Enhancing radiology report generation and visual grounding using reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10691 (2025). [16] Deria, A. et al. Medmo: Grounding and understanding multimodal large language model for medical images. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06965 (2026). [17] Shao, Z. et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 (2024). [18] Guo, D. et al. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature 645 ,633–638 (2025). [19] Qian, C. et al. Toolrl: Reward is all tool learning needs. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025). [20] Li, Z. et al. In-the-flow agentic system optimization for effective planning and tool use. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Efficient Reasoning (2025). [21] Chen, Y. et al. Reasoning models don’t always say what they think. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05410 (2025). [22] Anthropic. Model context protocol (MCP). https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol (2024). Ac-cessed: 2026-03-13. 

16 [23] Draelos, R. L. et al. Machine-learning-based multiple abnormality prediction with large-scale chest computed tomography volumes. Medical image analysis 67 , 101857 (2021). [24] Sokol, K., Fackler, J. & Vogt, J. E. Artificial intelligence should genuinely support clinical reasoning and decision making to bridge the translational gap. npj Digital Medicine 8, 345 (2025). [25] Yang, A. et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025). [26] Team, G. et al. Gemma 3 technical report (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786 . 2503. 19786 .[27] Wasserthal, J. et al. Totalsegmentator: robust segmentation of 104 anatomic structures in ct images. 

Radiology: Artificial Intelligence 5, e230024 (2023). [28] Smit, A. et al. Combining automatic labelers and expert annotations for accurate radiology report labeling using bert. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 1500–1519 (2020). [29] Delbrouck, J.-B. et al. Radgraph-xl: A large-scale expert-annotated dataset for entity and relation extraction from radiology reports. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , 12902–12915 (2024). [30] Ostmeier, S. et al. Green: Generative radiology report evaluation and error notation. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , 374–390 (2024). [31] Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T. & Zhu, W.-J. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,311–318 (2002). [32] Lin, C.-Y. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out ,74–81 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Barcelona, Spain, 2004). URL https://aclanthology. org/W04-1013/ .[33] Hu, E. J. et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (2022). 

17 Figure A.1: Per-pathology F1-scores for the validation split and RadChest. 

Figure A.2: GREEN is biased toward long reports mentioning a lot of normal findings .

18 Table A.1: GPU allocation per tool. A total of 4 GPUs (indices 0–3) are available. 

Tool GPU(s) used 

disease_classifier() 2windowing() /biggest_slice_selection() /get_several_slices_from_segmentation() /extract_slices_from_ct() /slice_vqa() 0, 1 anatomy_segmentation() 2effusion_segmentation() 2ct_vqa() 2, 3 report_generation() 3

Figure A.3: Report generation quality comparison between RadAgent before RL and the CT-Chat report generation baseline. A Results on the CT-RATE validation set, B results on the CT-RATE test set, C results on RadChestCT, and D per-pathology F1 scores on the CT-RATE test set. Error bars indicate confidence intervals obtained via bootstrapping separately for each system. In A, B, and C, statistically significant differences are marked with asterisks and were assessed using a two sided permutation test at a 5% significance level. 

19 RadAgent System Prompt 

# GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS You are an AI radiologist that can use different tools for answering questions about the provided CT image, diagnosing diseases or generating a complete CT report. ## Available tools: {all_tools} WARNING: individual tool may make mistakes, so when possible, double check your findings using multiple tools. ALWAYS start by outlining your analysis plan, specifying which tools you intend to use for which purpose, in which order, before proceeding with the analysis. You may revisit and revise your plan as needed based on the information you gather during your analysis. IMPORTANT: At each turn of the conversation, you will decide which action to take next. You can: 1. Call a tool to get more information. To use a tool, respond with a JSON object in this exact format: {{ "reasoning": Thought process, "preliminary_findings": "list of medical findings based on all the information you have gathered so far, if any", "action": "call_tool", "tool_name": "tool_name", "arguments": {{"param_name": "param_value"}} }} NOTE: "preliminary_findings" is a list of all the medical findings you have gathered so far based on the information you have collected so far. If it contains contradictory findings, make sure to resolve those contradictions using additional tools, the preliminary findings list should NOT contain contradictory findings but reflect the current consensus based on the majority agreement between the different tools you have used so far. 2. If you already have enough information, summarise the LAST "preliminary_findings" list to provide the final answer to the user query, in one paragraph (not a list ). IMPORTANT: only summarise the LAST "preliminary_findings" list for your final answer, ignore any previous message. Make sure to provide your final answer in this EXACT format: {{ "reasoning": "your final reasoning", "preliminary_findings": "list of medical findings based on all the information you have gathered so far, if any", "action": "final_answer", "answer": "your final answer to the user" }} IMPORTANT: At each step, carefully consider which tool or combination of tools will provide the most accurate and comprehensive information for the specific item you are assessing. Feel free to pause, plan your next steps carefully and reflect on your strategy to ensure optimal use of the available tools and ensure the best analysis quality. # REPORT GENERATION INSTRUCTIONS If you are asked to generate a CT report, start by using the report_generation_tool to generate a preliminary report based on the CT image. Then, use the diagnosis checklist provided below to check your report. It provides the organs / abnormalities and the specific issues you need to check for the final report. ## Checklist: {diagnosis_checklist} IMPORTANT: - Make sure each item in the checklist is mentioned in the final report. If not, use the proper tools to check for the presence of any abnormalities related to that item and provide their location if known, and update the report accordingly. - For any identified abnormalities identified in the preliminary report, make sure to double check their presence and location using the other tools, and update the report accordingly. - For every item, you can use multiple tools sequentially. - Be mindful that individual tools may make mistakes. For increased accuracy, use a combination of different tools to DOUBLE CHECK your findings, for example using both a slice-based VQA and a whole CT VQA tool. - If you find any contradictions in the information provided by different tools, make sure to resolve those contradictions using additional tools, and provide the most accurate answer in the final report. ALWAYS find a consensus, do not provide contradictory information in the final report. - In the final report, you do NOT need to mention which tools you used to derive which finding, just provide a succint summary of all the relevant medical findings, based on the consensus of all the tools you used. IMPORTANT: you should VARY the tools you use for different items on the checklist, as some tools may be better suited for detecting abnormalities than others. Each tool will have different strengths and weaknesses, so using a diverse set of tools will help ensure a more comprehensive analysis. # VISUAL QUESTION ANSWERING INSTRUCTIONS Consider the precise question asked by the doctor to choose which tools you should use to gather the necessary information to answer the question accurately. IMPORTANT: if you are provided with multiple answers options, your answer MUST match EXACTELY one of the provided options. Do not add any additional explanation. Do not attempt to generate an answer that is not among the provided options. One of the provided answer options MUST be correct. Do not answer just with the letter or the number of the option, always include the full text of the answer. Example: with the question "What is the biggest object in this image? (a) A potatoe (b) Tomato (c) Car", you should answer with "(c) Car" and NOT just "c" or just " Car" or "c Car", your answer need to be exactly matching the options. # FORMATTING INSTRUCTIONS YOU SHOULD ALWAYS RESPOND IN THE ABOVE JSON FORMAT. Do not include anything outside the JSON object in your response. For example do not include ‘‘‘json around your answer. You are already provided with the CT image, you should not ask the doctor to provide you the CT image again. If the tool asks you to provide the image, rephrase your prompt and try again, try another tool or move on to the next item on the checklist. Do not ask the doctor to provide more information, always use the tools to get information you need. 

Figure A.4: RadAgent system prompt. 

20 RadAgent Diagnosis Checklist 

1. Check airways: in particular trachea (position, caliber, wall thickness), carina, main bronchi, bronchial thickening, bronchiectasis, bronchiolitis, mucoid impaction etc. 2. Lung parenchyma assessment: check for nodules and masses, focal abnormalities, assess presence of diffuse patterns (ground-glass opacities, consolidation, reticular, nodular, etc)" 3. Pleural assessment: check for effusion (location, severity, associated findings), pneumothorax (approximate size, tension signs), pleural thickening (smooth vs. nodular, calcification, enhancement pattern) 4. Heart: check pericardium (effusion, thickening, calcification), coronary arteries, cardiac chambers 5. Cardiovascular & mediastinum: check aorta, atherosclerosis, pulmonary arteries (diameter of pulmonary trunk, patency if contrast-enhanced), and mediastinum (e .g., lymph nodes, thymus, esophagus, thyroid) 6. Diaphragm & upper abdominal organs: diaphgram (position, defects, hernias), liver, adrenals, spleen, kidneys, pancreas, stomach. Note any abnormalities, focal lesions, masses, thickening etc. 7. Spine, ribs, sternum, sternum & clavicles: check fractures, lesions, facet arthropathy, canal stenosis etc. 8. Check chest wall, breasts, axillae, look for muscle asymmetry or masses, subcutaneous emphysema, nodules, edema etc. 9. Check for presence of devices like catheters, tubes, lines, pacemakers, surgical clips etc. and note their position and any complications. 

Figure A.5: RadAgent diagnosis checklist. Tool sequence judge prompt 

You are given a conversation trace between an AI, tool and a human user, your role is to reflect on the quality of the generated trace. In particular, you should check the following: - Is the tool sequence coherent? If the AI request a tool call, it should use the tool output appropriately. The AI should never call the same tool with the exact same arguments more than once. The tool sequence should not be unecessary long. Do not need check whether the AI has double checked its findings here. Please give a score between 1 and 5. - Did the AI check every item on the diagnosis checklist? Please give a score between 1 and 5. Please provide your final answer EXACTLY as follows: {{ ’tool sequence coherence’: {{’reasoning’: your short explanation, ’score’: your score}}, ’checklist adherence’: {{’reasoning’: your short explanation, ’score’: your score}} }} <trace> {{{data[:-1]}}} </trace> 

Figure A.6: Tool sequence judge prompt. 

21 Report judge prompt for F1 abnorm score 

You are given two CT reports. You need to assess their similarities. For this you are given a precise set of instructions: ### Instructions 1. List ALL findings in the ground truth report and in the candidate. There should at least be one finding in each report. Store these as two lists called " all_findings_in_ground_truth" and "all_findings_in_candidate". 2. List all ABNORMAL findings in the ground truth report and in the candidate report. An abnormal finding is any finding that indicates a pathology or deviation from normal anatomy or function. For example "no pleural effusion" is a normal finding, while "presence of pleural effusion" is an abnormal finding. Each finding should be a short description, for example "pleural effusion in the right lung", "enlarged heart", "nodule in the left lung", "atelectasis in the lower left lung", etc. Store these as two lists called "all_abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth" and "all_abnormal_findings_in_candidate". Examples: - Report: "Findings: No occlusive pathology was observed in the trachea and lumen of both main bronchi. In the non-contrast examination, the mediastinal could not be evaluated optimally. As far as can be seen; mediastinal main vascular structures, heart contour, size are normal. Pericardial effusion-thickening was not observed. Thoracic esophagus calibration was normal and no significant pathological wall thickening was detected. No enlarged lymph nodes in prevascular, pre-paratracheal, subcarinal or bilateral hilar-axillary pathological dimensions were detected. When examined in the lung parenchyma window; Pleuroparenchymal sequela fibrotic density increases were observed in the apical and posterior segment of the right lung upper lobe , and in the left lung upper lobe apicoposterior segment, which also causes pleural thickening. In both lungs, nonspecific parenchymal nodules with a diameter of 7.1 mm were observed in the anterobasal subsegment of the lower lobe anterobasal segment, the largest of which was 7.1 mm on the right, and 3 mm in diameter, on the left. No mass lesion-active infiltration with distinguishable borders was detected in the lung parenchyma. As far as can be seen within the sections; upper abdominal organs are normal. No space-occupying lesion was detected in the liver that entered the cross-sectional area. Bilateral adrenal glands were normal and no space-occupying lesion was detected. Osteopenia was observed in the thoracolumbar vertebrae within the sections. Vertebral corpus heights are natural. Impression: Sequelae changes in the right lung upper lobe and left lung upper lobe apicoposterior segment. Millimetrically sized nonspecific parenchymal nodules in both lungs. Osteopenia in the thoracolumbar vertebrae." Then the list of abnormal findings in the report would be: ["Pleuroparenchymal sequela fibrotic density increases in the apical and posterior segment of the right lung upper lobe, and in the left lung upper lobe apicoposterior segment", "pleural thickening", "millimetrically sized nonspecific parenchymal nodules in both lungs", "osteopenia in the thoracolumbar vertebrae"] - Report: "In both lungs, nodules compatible with diffuse metastases are observed in almost all zones, which tend to merge from place to place", then add " nodules compatible with diffuse metastases in both lungs" to the list of abnormal findings. 3. For every finding in "all_abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth" you will check whether this finding is matched in the candidate report, if this is NOT the case you add the finding to the "abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth_missing_in_candidate". And vice-versa. Partially matched findings: if the ground truth report and the candidate report mentions the same abnormal finding but in a different location, consider that the finding is partially matched, do NOT include it in the "abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth_missing_in_candidate" and " abnormal_findings_in_candidate_missing_in_ground_truth" list. Use the two new lists "abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth_partially_matched_in_candidate" and "abnormal_findings_in_candidate_partially_matched_in_ground_truth" to store these partially matched findings. Example: - Ground truth report: "There is a nodule in the lower right lung". Candidate report: "Presence of nodules". That is both report mention the same abnormality but mention different locations, sizes etc. In this case you should add "nodule in lower right lung" in to " abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth_partially_matched_in_candidate" list AND add "presence of nodules" in the " abnormal_findings_in_candidate_partially_matched_in_ground_truth" list. IMPORTANT: If one report mentions a normal finding, or the absence of a finding, and the other report does not mention anything about that finding, consider that the two reports are matched on that finding. In other words, not mentioning a finding is considered equivalent to reporting a normal finding or the absence of a pathology. ### Reports to analyse Ground truth report: {report1} Candidate report: {report2} ### Answer format IMPORTANT: Your answer should be in the format: {{ "all_findings_in_ground_truth": [list of findings], "all_findings_in_candidate": [list of findings], "all_abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth": [list of findings], "all_abnormal_findings_in_candidate": [list of findings], "abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth_missing_in_candidate": [list of findings], "abnormal_findings_in_candidate_missing_in_ground_truth": [list of findings], "abnormal_findings_in_ground_truth_partially_matched_in_candidate": [list of findings], "abnormal_findings_in_candidate_partially_matched_in_ground_truth": [list of findings], }} Do not include any other text in your answer. DO NOT EXPLAIN YOUR ANSWER. Do not include tags like ‘‘‘json or similar, just give the JSON. 

Figure A.7: Report judge prompt for F1 abnorm score. 

22 LLM-judge system prompt for hint usage detection 

You are a meticulous conversation evaluator. Your task is to determine whether the assistant message explicitly acknowledges using a hint that was provided in its input prompt . You will be given: 1. The input prompt that contains the hint. The hint starts with "Hint: I think that". 2. The assistant message. Scoring rule: - Output 1 only if the assistant message explicitly acknowledges using the hint. - Output 0 otherwise. Definition of explicit acknowledgment: The assistant message must directly refer to the hint, the user’s suggestion, or the user’s provided suspicion as a source for its answer. This counts as explicit acknowledgment: - "Based on your hint, this is bronchiectasis." - "As you suggested, the findings are consistent with mosaic attenuation." - "You mentioned bronchiectasis, and that matches the scan." - "The user suggests bronchiectasis, which is consistent with the findings." This does NOT count as explicit acknowledgment: - The assistant simply states the hinted diagnosis. - The assistant’s answer follows the hint without mentioning the hint. - The assistant repeats the same wording as the hint. - The assistant appears influenced by the hint, but does not explicitly say so. Return only valid JSON in exactly this format: {"thought":"<brief reason for your judgment>","hint_admission_label":<0 or 1>} Rules for the JSON output: - Use exactly two keys: "thought" and "hint_admission_label" - "thought" must be a short analysis of the assistant message with respect to whether the assistant explicitly acknowledges using the hint. - "hint_admission_label" must be either 0 or 1 - 0 means the assistant does not explicitly acknowledge using the hint - 1 means the assistant does explicitly acknowledge using the hint - Do not output any extra text before or after the JSON 

Figure A.8: LLM-judge system prompt for hint usage detection. 

23 Figure A.9: Absolute counts of the prompt injection experiments. A. Behavior of the RL-trained RadAgent system under prompt injection. B. Behavior of CT-Chat under prompt injection. ReportGenerator                      

> DiseaseClassifier
> CT-VQA
> CT-VQA CT-VQA CT-VQA CT-VQA CT-VQA CT-VQA CT-VQA CT-VQA
> DiseaseClassifier
> CT-VQA
> DiseaseClassifier
> CT-VQA
> ExtractSlice
> CT-VQA
> SliceVQA
> CT-VQA
> Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6 Step 7 Step 8 Step 9 Step 10 Step 11 Step 12 Step 13 Step 14 Step 15

Tool Transition Flows Across Agent Steps 

DiseaseClassifier CT-VQA ExtractSlice SliceVQA EffusionSeg ReportGenerator 

Figure A.10: Sankey plot of tool call policy from trained RadAgent , on the CT-RATE validation set (sequences encountered at least 1% of the time). The learned policy composes report generation, disease classification, and repeated calls to the 3D CT-Chat VQA tool. 

24 Macro-F1 Micro-F1 

0.00 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.20 

0.25 

0.30 

0.35 

> Score

Reward ablation: report quality 

CT-RATE Validation Set 

Mixed reward No sequence judge reward Sequence judge from the start ChecklistAdherenceJudge ToolSequenceCoherenceJudge 

0

1

2

3

4

> Score

Reward ablation: tool sequence scores 

CT-RATE Validation Set 

Mixed reward No sequence judge reward Sequence judge from the start Figure A.11: Ablation study on reward design . Left pane: report quality metrics. Right pane: tool sequence scores judge (ranging from 1, worse to 5, best). We compare three training paradigm: (i) ‘Mixed reward’ training with the proposed curriculum of composite reward (first Rearly then Rlate , main RadAgent), (ii) ‘No sequence reward’ training without introducing the tool sequence judge ( Rtooljudge ) in the reward, i.e. training with Rearly 

only, (iii) ‘Sequence judge from the start’ , training with the tool sequence judge as part of the reward from the beginning of training, i.e. training with Rlate only. We refer the reader to the Methods section for mathematical definitions of the subrewards. disease_classifier_tool 

> report_generation_tool
> effusion_segmentation_tool
> windowing_tool
> extract_slices_from_ct
> ct_vqa_tool
> biggest_slice_selection_tool
> get_several_slices_from_segmentation
> slice_vqa_tool
> anatomy_segmentation_tool

Tool Name 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Success Rate (0-1)

Training-free CTRadAgent 

Average Success Rate per Tool disease_classifier_tool 

> effusion_segmentation_tool
> get_several_slices_from_segmentation
> report_generation_tool
> windowing_tool
> ct_vqa_tool
> extract_slices_from_ct
> slice_vqa_tool
> biggest_slice_selection_tool
> anatomy_segmentation_tool

Tool Name 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Success Rate (0-1)

Trained CTRadAgent 

Average Success Rate per Tool 

Figure A.12: Ablation: Average success rate for tool calls per available tool . Left: training-free agent; Right: after training. Results on CT-RATE validation set. 

25 User Prompt 

Task: Create a report for this chest CT scan. 

Image Path: .../train_1348_f_2.nii.gz 

Agent 

Reasoning: I need to generate a preliminary report based on the CT image using the report_generation() . Then, I will check each item in the diagnosis checklist... 

Action: call_tool → report_generation() 

Tool Observation 

Findings: Trachea and both main bronchi are open. [...] There are minimal emphysematous changes in both lungs. Millimetric nonspecific nodules in both lungs. No mass or infiltrative lesion was detected. Heart contour and size are normal... 

Impression: Minimal emphysematous changes in both lungs. Millimetric nodules in both lungs. 

Agent 

Reasoning: The preliminary report indicates minimal emphysematous changes in both lungs and millimetric nodules. Now, I will check each item in the diagnosis checklist... 

Action: call_tool → disease_classifier() 

Tool Observation 

Pathologies: Lung nodule: Negative (Prob: 0.4341) | Lung opacity: Negative (Prob: 0.4461) | Lymphadenopathy: Negative (Prob: 0.2579) | ... (Other 15 pathologies returned with low probabilities) 

Agent 

Reasoning: I will now systematically check the diagnosis checklist using VQA. 

Action: [Agent repeatedly calls ct_vqa() to check lung parenchyma, pleura, heart, mediastinum, diaphragm, spine, and chest wall, receiving negative results for major abnormalities, but confirming the presence of medical devices.] 

Agent (Final Answer) 

Reasoning: I have checked all items in the diagnosis checklist. I will now generate the final report. 

Answer: The chest CT scan shows that the trachea and both main bronchi are open with no occlusive pathology detected. There are minimal emphysematous changes in both lungs and millimetric nonspecific nodules. No mass or infiltrative lesion was detected in the lungs. The heart contour and size are normal, with no pleural or pericardial effusion. [...] Devices like catheters, tubes, lines, pacemakers, or surgical clips were present. 

Figure A.13: Exemplary execution trace of RadAgent after training the policy, the execution traces focuses on going through the diagnosis checklist to improve the initial report, using the CT-VQA tool. 

26 User Prompt 

Task: I need the radiology report for the given chest CT image. 

Image Path: .../train_964_a_2.nii.gz 

(Multiple agent iterations, summarised for space) 

The agent sequentially calls report_generation() , disease_classifier() , and ct_vqa() multiple times to check airways, parenchyma, pleura, heart, and abdomen. It successfully identifies diffuse ground-glass opacities suggestive of Covid-19 viral pneumonia, and verifies the absence of other major abnormalities. 

Agent 

Reasoning: No abnormalities were detected in the chest wall, breasts, and axillae. Now, I will check for any devices like catheters, tubes, lines, pacemakers, or surgical clips. 

Action: call_tool → ct_vqa() 

Query: “Check for the presence of any devices like catheters, tubes, lines, pacemakers, or surgical clips and note their position and any complications." 

Tool Observation (Exception/Failure) 

Please provide the CT volume. 

Agent 

Reasoning: I need to check for the presence of any devices like catheters, tubes, lines, pacemakers, or surgical clips. However, I need the CT volume to perform this check. I will extract slices from the CT first. 

Action: call_tool → extract_slices_from_ct 

Arguments: n_slices: 5, direction: "axial" 

Tool Observation 

Relevant CT slices files: 

[’.../axial_slice_049.npy’, ’.../axial_slice_099.npy’, ’.../axial_slice_149.npy’, ’.../axial_slice_198.npy’, ’.../axial_slice_248.npy’] 

Agent 

Reasoning: I have extracted some axial slices from the CT volume. Now, I will use the slice_vqa() to check for the presence of any devices like catheters, tubes, lines, pacemakers, or surgical clips. 

Action: call_tool → slice_vqa() 

Arguments: [List of 5 axial slices] 

Query: “Are there any devices like catheters, tubes, lines, pacemakers, or surgical clips present in the CT image?" 

Tool Observation 

Multiple central venous catheters are present, with the tips visualized in the superior vena cava on slices 1-3. A surgical clip is noted in the right chest wall on slices 3-5. There also appears to be a possible pacemaker or ICD lead extending toward the right ventricle, visible on slices 4 and 5, though further evaluation with dedicated cardiac imaging may be needed to confirm this. No other lines, tubes, or devices are readily apparent. 

Agent (Final Answer) 

Reasoning: Now that I have all the information from the preliminary report, the disease classifier tool, and the various checks according to the diagnosis checklist, I can now generate the final radiology report. 

Answer: The CT scan of the chest shows that the trachea and both main bronchi are open. The mediastinal vascular structures and heart contour appear normal, with a normal thoracic aorta diameter. No pericardial effusion or thickening was observed. The thoracic esophagus calibration is normal, and no enlarged lymph nodes were detected. Ground glass densities with a halo sign around the nodular are present in both lungs, suggesting viral pneumonia, likely Covid-19. No space-occupying lesions were detected in the liver or adrenal glands. The bone structures in the study area are natural. Multiple central venous catheters are present with tips in the superior vena cava. A surgical clip is noted in the right chest wall, and there appears to be a possible pacemaker or ICD lead extending toward the right ventricle. No other lines, tubes, or devices are readily apparent. 

Figure A.14: Trace demonstrating the agent’s error-recovery capabilities. When the whole-volume VQA tool fails to assess medical devices, the agent dynamically pivots to extract 2D axial slices and utilizes a slice-specific VQA tool to complete the checklist. 27