Title: ZScribbleSeg: A comprehensive segmentation framework with modeling of efficient annotation and maximization of scribble supervision

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.06266v1

Published Time: Fri, 08 May 2026 01:37:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
> arXiv:2605.06266v1 [cs.CV] 7 May 2026
> Medical Image Analysis (2026)
> Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

# Medical Image Analysis 

> journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/media

# ZScribbleSeg: A comprehensive segmentation framework with modeling of e ffi cient annotation and maximization of scribble supervision 

Ke Zhang a,b,1 , Bomin Wang a,1 , Hangqi Zhou a, Xiahai Zhuang a, ∗

> aSchool of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China
> bDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O      

> Article history :
> 2000 MSC: 41A05, 41A10, 65D05, 65D17
> Keywords: Medical Image Segmentation, Scribble Supervision, Mixture Model, Medical Image Analysis,

A B S T R A C T Curating fully annotated datasets for medical image segmentation is labour-intensive and expertise-demanding. To alleviate this problem, prior studies have explored scrib-ble annotations for weakly supervised segmentation. Existing solutions mainly com-pute losses on annotated areas and generate pseudo labels by propagating annotations to adjacent regions. However, these methods often su ff er from inaccurate and unrealis-tic segmentations due to insu ffi cient supervision and incomplete shape information. In contrast, we first investigate the principle of good scribble annotations, which leads to effi cient scribble forms via supervision maximization and randomness simulation. We further introduce regularization terms to encode the spatial relationship and the shape constraints, where the EM algorithm is utilized to estimate the mixture ratios of la-bel classes. These ratios are critical in identifying the unlabeled pixels for each class and correcting erroneous predictions, thus the accurate estimation lays the foundation for the incorporation of spatial prior. Finally, we integrate the e ffi cient scribble super-vision with the prior into a framework, referred to as ZScribbleSeg, and apply it to multiple scenarios. Leveraging only scribble annotations, ZScribbleSeg achieves com-petitive performance on six segmentation tasks including ACDC, MSCMRseg, BTCV, MyoPS, Decathlon-BrainTumor and Decathlon-Prostate. Our code will be released via https: // github.com /DLwbm123 /ZScribbleSeg. 

© 2026 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 

1. Introduction 

In recent years, deep neural networks has demonstrated its potential on various visual tasks (Zhao et al., 2024). How-ever, the success of these methods relies on massive annota-tions, which require labor-intensive manual e ff orts. For medical imaging, the dense manual labeling can take several hours to an-notate just one image for experienced doctors, which is both ex-pensive and expertise-demanding (Zhuang, 2019a). Numerous 

> ∗Xiahai Zhuang is the corresponding author. Email: zxh@fudan.edu.cn; Ke Zhang currently is a PhD student at Johns Hopkins University, and this work was done when she was in Fudan University.
> 1These authors contributed equally to this work.

eff orts have contributed to the area of training segmentation net-works with weaker annotations, including scribbles (Han et al., 2024), bounding boxes (Wei et al., 2023), points (Lin et al., 2023), and image-level labels (Kuang et al., 2023). Numer-ous studies have been reported utilizing only image-level la-bels (Kuang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). These methods mainly rely on large-scale training datasets, and tend to underperform on small medical image datasets. On the contrary, scribbles are suitable for labeling nested structures and easy to obtain in practice. Several works have demonstrated their potential on both semantic and medical image segmenta-tion (Han et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2022; Khoreva et al., 2017). Therefore, we aim to investigate this specific form of weakly 2 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

supervised medical image segmentation using only scribble an-notations for model training. Conventionally, scribble annotations are mainly focused on delineating the structures of interest (Valvano et al., 2021). This can be e ff ective in segmenting regular structures with fixed shape patterns. Hence, this task is often referred to as regu-lar structure segmentation . However, such methods are chal-lenged when applied to irregular targets with heterogeneous distributions, such as pathologies. This is also referred to as 

irregular (object) segmentation , which is particularly challeng-ing for the medical tasks with small training datasets. Existing scribble learning approaches mainly typically focus on recon-structing complete labels from scribbles and then using the re-sulting pseudo labels for training. These methods include 1) 

label expansion strategies that assume the pixels with similar features are likely to be in the same category (Ji et al., 2019), and 2) ensemble methods that generate labels by fusing sev-eral independent predictions (Luo et al., 2022). These methods are prone to label noise from inaccurate segmentation propos-als. To overcome this issue, Obukhov et al. (2019b) proposed a regularization loss, which exploited the similarity between la-beled and unlabeled regions. Adversarial learning approach has also been applied to scribble-supervised segmentation by lever-aging shape prior provided by additional full annotations (Val-vano et al., 2021). Scribble-supervised segmentation generally su ff ers from in-adequate supervision and imbalanced label classes. This of-ten results in under segmentation of target structures, where the volumes of segmented structures tend to be shrunk (see Sec-tion 3.3.1). To address the problem of inadequate supervision, we first investigate the principles of generating good scribbles ,which serve both as guidance for annotation design and as a foundation for supervision augmentation. The goal is to design effi cient scribbles that maximize supervision without additional annotation costs. Our studies demonstrate that the model train-ing benefit from the randomness of wide range distributed scrib-bles and larger proportion of annotated areas. Inspired by this, we propose to simulate such types of scribble-annotated images as a means of supervision augmentation . This can be achieved via mixup and occlusion operations on existing training images, and the supervision augmentation is coupled with regularization terms penalizing any inconsistency in the segmentation results. Despite the lack of supervision, the scribble annotations typ-ically have imbalanced annotated label proportions, leading to biased shape information. As a result, the model cannot accu-rately capture the global shape of target structures. We there-fore further propose to correct the problematic prediction us-ing prior-based regularization. This requires the critical step of estimating the mixture proportion (ratio) of each label class (referred to as π prior). We propose an algorithm to estimate this prior and use it to construct a spatial loss defined on the marginal probabilities of pixel labels and spatial energy. This spatial loss is a regularization term aimed to correct the shape of segmentation results. The supervision augmentation and prior-based regularization work in a complementary way, and both contribute to the stable and robust training on a variety of seg-mentation tasks. The proposed scribble-supervised segmentation method, re-ferred to as ZScribbleSeg, extends and generalizes the al-gorithms in our two preliminary works (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a,b), and has more scientific significance in the follow-ing aspects: Firstly, we investigate principles of e ffi cient scrib-ble forms to guide the supervision augmentation, which have never been reported to the best of our knowledge. Secondly, we propose a new strategy leveraging spatial prior to adjust the predicted probability with computed spatial energy. Thirdly, we generalize ZScribbleSeg to the 3D cases, and validate the proposed framework on five use cases (datasets), including 3D Prostate segmentation (Decathlon-Prostate), cardiac structural segmentation (ACDC), LGE segmentation (MSCMRseg), and myocardial pathology segmentation combining three-sequence MRI (MyoPS). The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. 

• We propose a comprehensive framework for scribble-supervised segmentation that models e ffi cient scribbles and corrects network predictions with prior regularization. This framework aims to alleviate the problems of inade-quate supervision and under-segmentation. 

• To augment the supervision of scribble annotations, we first investigate the principles of e ffi cient scribble forms. Motivated by the findings that network benefits from larger and randomly distributed annotation, we model e ffi cient scribbles by maximizing supervision via mixup and en-hancing randomness via occlusion. 

• To tackle the unders-egmentation and shape distoration problems, we propose a prior-guided mechanism to correct the shape of model prediction based on prior regulariza-tion, including π prior, spatial prior, and shape constraints. We utilize the EM algorithm to estimate π prior, based on which we propose the spatial prior loss to encode spatial relationship. 

• Our approach achieved competitive performance in weakly supervised segmentation across diverse tasks, including regular structures in cardiac anatomy, regu-lar structures in pathology-enhanced imaging, irregular pathological objects, and 3D prostate segmentation. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly introduces the relevant research. In Section 3, we de-scribe the modelling of e ffi cient scribbles and the computation of the prior. Section 4 presents the results of the e ffi ciency, ab-lation, and validation study. Finally, we conclude this work in Section 5. 

2. Related work 

This section provides a brief review of weakly supervised segmentation methods. Besides, we describe data augmenta-tion strategies and regularization loss functions that are closely related to our work. K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 3

> Fig. 1. Roadmap of the proposed ZScribbleSeg framework.

2.1. Weakly supervised segmentation 

Recently, a variety of weakly supervised segmentation strate-gies have been developed to reduce the manual annotation ef-forts (Lin et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Kweon et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025b). Among them, the scribbles are of particular interest for the application to medical image annotation, given by their advantage in annotating nested structures. Current weakly supervised learning methods with image-level annota-tions mainly generate label seeds with Class Activation Map (CAM) (Zhou et al., 2016) at first, and then train the network with refined pseudo labels. However, the training of CAM re-quires a large scale of training data labeled with rich visual classes, which is not practical in clinical applications. There-fore, we investigate the scribble-supervised segmentation, due to its e ffi ciency and e ff ectiveness in both medical scenarios. Scribble is a form of sparse annotation that provides labels for a small subset of pixels in an image (Tajbakhsh et al., 2020). Previous approaches mainly calculate losses for annotated pix-els. One group of works is designed to expand the annotations and reconstruct the full label for network training. However, the expansion of labels needs to be achieved through iterative computation, which is particularly time-consuming. To allevi-ate it, several works removed the relabeling process and instead adopted conditional random fields to perform the refinement of segmentation results Can et al. (2018); Tang et al. (2018). How-ever, the common issue is the unstable model training caused by noisy pseudo labels. To obtain high-quality pseudo labels and update it through-out the training process, Luo et al. (2022) proposed to mix the predictions from a dual-branch network as auxiliary pseudo la-bels. This approach has achieved promising results on cardiac segmentation, but is still susceptible to inaccurate supervisions, especially on more challenging tasks with irregular objects. ScribFormer Li et al. (2024) introduces a transformer-based approach for scribble-supervised medical image segmentation. It adopts a hybrid CNNTransformer design, where CNN mod-ules capture fine-grained local spatial details and Transformer blocks model long-range contextual dependencies. Chen et al. (2025a) addresses inconsistent and incomplete scribble anno-tations by constructing a reference set from class-specific to-kens and pixel-level features and using it as a shape prior to guide pixel-level feature matching for unlabelled pixels. HELP-Net Zhang et al. (2025) introduces a hierarchical perturbation consistency module to improve feature learning via density-controlled jigsaw perturbations across global, local, and focal views, enabling multiscale structural representation learning. It further uses an entropy-guided pseudo-label module to es-timate prediction confidence and generate pseudo-labels, and a structural prior refinement module that incorporates connectiv-ity analysis and image boundary priors to refine pseudo-label quality. Other works Valvano et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2020) included new modules to evaluate the quality of segmenta-tion masks, which encourages the predictions to be realistic, but requiring extra full annotations. Gao et al. (2022) intro-duced a weakly- and semi-supervised segmentation framework that learns from sparse scribble annotations and large unla-beled datasets using teacher-student consistency and a multi-angle projection reconstruction loss. It demonstrates strong robustness and generalization on multiple datasets. Liu et al. (2025a) combines a foreground-background separation loss and a foreground augmentation strategy with diverse context to im-prove foreground discrimination and generalization. Meng et al. (2023) combines superpixel-guided scribble walking for denser supervision expansion and class-wise contrastive regularization for improving class feature compactness under scribble super-vision. Chen et al. (2025b) introduced Scribble2D5, a scribble-supervised 2.5D framework for volumetric segmentation that combines label propagation, boundary prediction, and an op-tional shape-prior module using unpaired segmentation masks. Scribbles have been also adopted for user interaction to improve the results predicted by a model. A group of studies (Asad et al., 2022; Roth et al., 2021) investigated the interactive segmen-tation methods based on scribbles, to refine results, accelerate training and facilitate fine-tuning. 

2.2. Data augmentation 

Augmentation methods are investigated to improve the model generalization ability, by synthesizing virtual training examples in the vicinity of the training dataset (Garcea et al., 2023). Common strategies include random cropping, rotation, flipping and adding noise. A line of research works have been proposed on Mixup augmentation (Qin et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2020, 2021), which blends two image-label pairs to generate new samples for classification tasks. Input Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) was introduced to per-form linear interpolation between two images and their labels. Kim et al. (2020) proposed Puzzle Mix to leverage the saliency and local statistics to facilitate image combination. SUMix Qin et al. (2024) futher proposed to learn the mixing ratio as well as the uncertainty for the mixed samples during the training pro-cess For medical image analysis, Mixup methods have been adopted for image segmentation (Chaitanya et al., 2019) and object detection tasks (Wang et al., 2020). Although mixup op-eration may generate unrealistic samples, mixed soft labels can provide rich information and improve the model performance on semi-supervised segmentation (Chaitanya et al., 2019). 4 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

2.3. Regularization losses 

Neural networks perform pixel-wise image segmentation, typically trained with cross-entropy or Dice loss. To predict coherent segmentation in the global sense (Kohl et al., 2018), several methods are proposed to regularize the neural network training. Here, we focus on the consistency regularization and prior regularization that most relevant to our work. In addi-tion, Perturbation-based interpretability methods (e.g., Mean-ingful Perturbations (Fong Ruth, 2017) and Extremal Perturba-tions (Fong et al., 2019)) optimize a perturbation mask under sparsity constraints to identify evidence regions for post-hoc classifier explanations. In contrast, our method does not op-timize a perturbation mask. Instead, during segmentation train-ing, we rank a class-wise spatial energy map, use the estimated class mixture ratio ( π prior) to select class-specific pixel sub-sets, and apply this process as a regularizer for prediction cor-rection in scribble-supervised segmentation. The consistency regularization leverages the fact that the per-turbed versions of the same image patch should have the con-sistent segmentation. A series of research has been conducted on consistency regularization (Zhu et al., 2017; Ouali et al., 2020). Regularization losses have also been used in segmenta-tion to suppress false positives and constrain prediction extent. For example, uncertainty-based background regularization can be implemented by maximizing prediction entropy over back-ground regions, together with region-balancing constraints to avoid trivial solutionsp Belharbi et al. (2021). In addition, Ker-vadec et al. (2019); Jia et al. (2017) regularize predictions by imposing externally specified region-size constraints (e.g., tar-get size ranges or expert-provided area estimates). In contrast, our prior regularization is designed to address class imbalance and under-segmentation by first estimating class mixture ratios (the π prior) on unlabeled pixels and then using this estimated prior to construct spatial regularization for prediction correc-tion. The proposed regularization of π prior is inspired from the binary mixture proportion estimation (Bekker and Davis, 2018; Garg et al., 2021; Ramaswamy et al., 2016), which was origi-nally designed for binary (two-class) positive unlabeled learn-ing (Du Plessis et al., 2015; Kiryo et al., 2017). For multi-class segmentation, the mixture ratios of classes are both imbalanced and inter-dependent, which cannot be solved by existing binary estimation methods. 

3. Method 

3.1. Overview 

Problem Setup: This work investigates the scenario of scribble-supervised segmentation, where the training images are solely annotated with a small number of pixels, via scrib-bles for each label class. 

Motivation and Strategy: To augment the supervision of scribble annotations, we first investigate di ff erent forms of scribbles. This allows us to establish principles of e ffi ciency that maximize supervision without additional scribble e ff ort. These principles enable e ff ective and robust model training with minimal annotation cost. Motivated by the principles, we intro-duce supervision augmentation and consistency regularization to maximize supervision while preserving global consistency. To tackle the under-segmentation problem, we further propose a prior-guided regularization scheme to exploit shape information and correct network predictions. Specifically, we first utilize the EM algorithm to estimate the class mixture ratios. Building on these estimates, we introduce a spatial prior loss by ranking spatial energy and selecting class-specific pixels. In addition, because scribble annotations are sparse, the network often pro-duces fragmented predictions with multiple disconnected com-ponents. We therefore introduce a shape regularization term to promote inter-connectivity within the structure. 

Solution: We develop ZScribbleSeg consisting of (1) modeling effi cient scribbles via supervision maximization and random-ness simulation; (2) modeling and computation of the priors, including label class proportion prior, spatial prior, and shape constraints; (3) integration to develop deep neural network (re-ferred to as ZScribbleNet) having losses of partial cross entropy (Lpce ), global consistency ( Lglobal ), spatial prior loss ( Lspatial ), shape regularization ( Lshape ) and training strategy of supervi-sion augmentation and prior regularization. Figure 1 presents the roadmap of the proposed framework. 

3.2. Principle and modeling of e ffi cient scribbles 

We investigate the principles of e ffi cient scribbles and derive the objective of maximizing supervision with minimal anno-tation e ff orts. This leads to the proposal of supervision aug-mentation. In addition, we propose a global consistency loss to penalize the non-equivalence in the augmentation. 

3.2.1. Principles of e ffi cient scribbles 

We shall verify the two principles of achieving e ffi cient scrib-ble annotation in terms of maximal supervision later through the experiments in Section 4.2: (1) The large proportion of pixels annotated by scribbles com-pared with the whole set. When the amount of annotated pixels increases, the performance of the model will gradually converge to the upper bound of full annotations. Our goal is to investigate the e ff ective strategies to compensate for missing annotations and match the performance of full annotations. (2) The randomness of the distribution of scribbles. This is rep-resented by the random and wide-range annotations. Firstly, we are motivated by the knowledge that model train-ing benefits from the finer gradient flow through a larger propor-tion of annotated pixels (Tajbakhsh et al., 2020). Therefore, we try to increase the annotation proportion with same e ff ort. One natural idea is to simply expand the width of scribbles. How-ever, this way only increases the label amount in the local area, and lacks the ability to enlarge the annotation range across the entire image. Secondly, we are inspired by the fact that the imaging data are easier to be restored from random samples of pixels than K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 5 

> Fig. 2. Overview of the training losses for the proposed ZScribbleNet, which consists of modeling of e ffi cient scribbles, computation of priors and shape regularization term. The scribble modeling includes mixup augmentation, regularized with global consistency ( Lglobal ). The prior comprises class mixture ratios ( π) and spatial prior. These components contribute to the spatial prior loss ( Lspatial ) and the shape regularization loss

(Lshape ). Note that spatial prior loss is complementary with the partial cross entropy loss ( Lpce ) which is solely calculated for labeled pixels. from down-sampled low-resolution images with regular pat-terns (Gao and Zhuang, 2020). This was due to the fact that the randomly and sparsely distributed samples maintain the global structure of the imaging data, which therefore can be restored with existing low-rank or self-similarity regularization terms. By contrast, the regularly down-sampled low-resolution images have evidently reduced tensor ranks, compared with the origi-nal high-resolution data, thus lose the global structure informa-tion. Motivated by this, we assume the features of full segmen-tation (similarly to the global structure information) can be por-trayed (restored) with sparse scribble annotations randomly and widely distributed within the entire dataset. With such scrib-ble annotation, the segmentation network can easily learn the global shape prior. 

3.2.2. Modeling via supervision augmentation 

Based on the observations that large-proportion annotated pixels and randomness of distribution lead to e ffi cient scribbles, we propose to model e ffi cient scribbles by supervision augmen-tation simulating large annotation proportion and randomness of scribble distribution. Specifically, we aim to generate train-ing images with e ffi cient scribbles by maximizing the supervi-sion via mixup operations and achieving randomness via occlu-sion operations. To mightigate the shape distortion induced by mixup operations, we further propose a global consistency loss. This resembles data augmentation, which increases the data di-versity and enables robust training. 

Search optimal annotation with mixup: Motivated by the principles of e ffi cient scribble, we first seek the optimal scribble with a large annotated ratio, high supervision, and unchanged local features. To achieve that, instead of maximizing the an-notations directly, we aim to maximize the saliency of mixed images , which measures the sensitivity of the model to inputs. Specifically, We utilize PuzzleMix (Kim et al., 2020) as the mixup operation. Given that the annotated area tends to be accompanied by high saliency, maximizing saliency also in-creases the scribble annotations. We define an imagescribble pair ( X, Y) as an image X to-gether with its corresponding scribble annotation Y. We denote (X1, Y1) and ( X2, Y2) are two di ff erent image-scribble pairs that are sampled independently from the training set with dimension 

n. We denote the resulted mixed image-label pair as ( X′

> 12

, Y′

> 12

). The transportation process is defined by: 

X′ 

> 12

= T (X1, X2) and Y′ 

> 12

= T (Y1, Y2),

T (X1, X2) = (1 − β) ⊙ ∏1 X1 + β ⊙ ∏2 X2,

where T (X1, X2) represents the transportation process between image X1 and X2; ∏i denotes the transportation matrix of size 

n × n for image Xi; β means the mask with value [0 , 1] of di-mension n; ⊙ is the element-wise multiplication. Then, we aim to maximize the saliency of transportation result over the pa-rameters {∏1, ∏2, β }:

{∏1, ∏2, β } = arg max ∏1,∏2,β 

[(1 − β) ⊙ ∏1 M(X1) + β ⊙ ∏2 M(X2)] ,

where M(X) denotes the saliency map of image X, which is obtained by computing the l2 norm of gradient values. We solve this optimization problem based on PuzzleMix (Kim et al., 2020). To preserve the local statistical features, the optimiza-tion objective also includes the image local smoothness and the mixing weight prior. For details of the optimization objective, we refer readers to PuzzleMix (Kim et al., 2020) and the Sec-tion 1 of the supplementary materials. 6 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

> Fig. 3. Illustration of supervision augmentation and global consistency. Supervision maximization is achieved with the mix augmentation to increase the annotated proportion and data variety. Global consistency requires the segmentation result of mixed image and unmixed image to be consistent.

Introduce randomness via occlusion: We propose to simu-late randomly distributed scribbles via occlusion. Specifically, one square area of the mixed image is randomly dropped and its label is set to be the background. Since that the proportion of the background annotated by scribbles tends to be smaller than that of the foreground classes, the occlusion operation al-leviates the imbalance problem of class mixture ratios within labeled pixels, and further improves the results of mixture ratio estimation, which will be elaborated in Section 3.3.2. We denote the occluded image-label pair as ( X′′ , Y′′ ), which is obtained by: 

X′′  

> 12

= (1 − 1b) ⊙ X′

> 12

,

Y′′  

> 12

= (1 − 1b) ⊙ Y′

> 12

,

where 1b denotes a rectangular mask of size n × n with value in [0 , 1]. The rectangular mask is randomly rotated to occlude the mixed image, and turns the occluded area into background. Following (Yun et al., 2019), we set the size of rectangular to be 32 × 32. This size is suitable for typical spatial scale of car-diac structures in 2D slices. Smaller masks introduce limited perturbation and fail to increase the diversity of labeled back-ground pixels, whereas significantly larger masks remove too much image content and may disrupt local anatomical cues. 

Global consistency loss: The objective of global consistency regularization is to leverage the mix-invariant property. As Fig-ure 3 shows, global consistency requires the same image patch to have consistent segmentation in two scenarios, i.e. , the un-mixed image and the mixed image. Let the segmentation re-sult of image X predicted by network be ˆ Y = f (X). For the transported image X′ 

> 12

= T (X1, X2), the consistency of mixup is formulated as: 

T ( f (X1), f (X2)) = f (T (X1, X2)) ,

which requires the segmentation of mixed image to be consis-tent with the mixed segmentation, after the same transportation process. When applying the occlusion operation, we further have: (1 − 1b) ⊙ T ( ˆ Y1, ˆY2) = f ((1 − 1b) ⊙ T (X1, X2)) . (1) Then, we propose to minimize the distance between two sides of Eq.(1). Let u12 = (1 − 1b) ⊙ T ( ˆ Y1, ˆY2) and 

v12 = f ((1 − 1b) ⊙ T (X1, X2)). The negative cosine similarity 

Ln(u12 , v12 ) is defined as: 

Ln(u12 , v12 ) = − u · v

|| u12 || 2 · || v12 || 2

.

Taking the symmetrical metric into consideration, we similarly penalize the inconsistency between u21 and v21 . Therefore, the global consistency loss is formulated as: 

Lglobal = 12 [Ln(u12 , v12 ) + Ln(u21 , v21 )] . (2) 

Discussion: The mix operations of mixup and occlusion could change the shape of target structures, resulting in the unrealistic image. To tackle it, as Figure 3 shows, we propose to combine the partial cross entropy (PCE) loss for labeled pixels of both mixed and unmixed images, and leverage mix equivalence to preserve shape consistency at the global level. To further exploit the shape features, we propose to correct the network prediction guided by the computed prior, which is described in Section 3.3. 

3.3. Modeling and computation of the priors 

To further exlploit the shape features and tackle the under-segmentation problem, as Figure 1 shows, we model class mix-ture ratios, the spatial prior, and the shape constraints to better capture shape information and regularize the network training. As visualized in Figure 5, we compute the spatial energy to re-flect the probabilities of pixels belonging to each class. We seek to estimate the critical prior of label class proportions, referred to as π, which guides the correction of erroneous network pre-diction. 

3.3.1. Problems statement 

The segmentation network trained with scribbles tends to generate under segmentation results of the target structures. K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 7

(a) (b) 

> Fig. 4. Two under segmentation examples indicated by yellow arrows: (a) foreground classes (left and right ventricles) in ACDC dataset; (b) back-ground in MyoPS dataset.

Considering that the annotated ratio of classes can be imbal-anced, the scribble-supervised learning also brings challenges to the estimation of class mixture ratios π.

Imbalanced classes : Firstly, the number of pixels of di ff erent label class (denoted using nk, where N = ∑mk=1 nk) in an image can be di ff erent. We denote this ratio of label class as class mix-ture ratios, π = {πk}mk=1, and nk = N × πk. Secondly, the ratios of scribble-annotated pixels to all the pixels of a label class, de-noted as a = {ak}mk=1, are generally di ff erent. In fully supervised segmentation, imbalanced classes from di ff erent class mixture ratios generally do not represent a challenge, as this ratio for each training image is known from the gold standard segmenta-tion ( πk = nk/N), where one can also view the annotation ratios of all labels are all equal to one, i.e., ak = 1, k = 1, . . . , m. How-ever, in scribble supervision we only have information about the scribble-annotated pixels of each class in a training image. Let us denote the numbers of annotated pixels of label classes as 

nl = {nkl }mk=1, where nkl = nk × ak and nk = N × πk. Without the information of either mixture ratio πk or annotation ratio ak,the model could not learn the coverage (number of pixels, nk)for each class during training, thus easily leading to the phe-nomenon of under segmentation for certain classes. 

Under segmentation: As Figure 4 shows, under segmenta-tion refers to the results, where the size of segmented structure is generally smaller than ground truth, a phenomenon caused by the imbalanced annotated proportion and missed shape in-formation. Note that Over-segmentation is inherently unlikely to occur in scribble-supervised settings because sparse anno-tations provide only positive evidence for foreground. Since unlabeled pixels are not treated as foreground, it is hard to en-courage the model to expand the predicted region beyond the foreground structures during training. To solve the problem, we propose to evaluate π and the spatial prior, which are crucial for the shape refinement. The accurate estimation of π can cor-rect the imbalanced label ratios, and enable model to adjust the size of segmentation result. The computation of spatial prior is able to encode the feature similarity between pixels, and rectify the shape of target structures. We encode π and the spatial prior with a spatial prior loss, by ranking the spatial energy and se-lect the top π ratio as the segmentation. To estimate π, we start from the imbalanced class frequencies and adapt it from labeled pixels to unlabeled pixels. Note that the problem of under segmentation can be even worse without the modeling of e ffi cient scribbles. In the case of manually annotated scribbles, the resulting annotations may be distributed in a non-random pattern due to fixed labeling habits, resulting in the biased label distribution across the whole dataset. This problem could be alleviated by simulating ran-domly distributed labels through our proposed supervision aug-mentation. 

Challenges of π estimation: The evaluation of class mixture ratios is a critical bottleneck in semi-/ weak-/ non-supervised learning, and serves as the basis of classes identification (Garg et al., 2021) and variance reduction (Wu and Zhuang, 2022; Sakai et al., 2017). However, existing methods are mainly proposed for binary classification, and can not be adapted to multi-class scenario directly. For segmentation task, the class mixture ratios are both imbalanced and interdependent, lead-ing to the decrease in the performance of previous binary esti-mation approaches. Despite the class imbalance problem, the scribble-supervised segmentation is also faced with the imbal-ance of annotated class ratios. For example, the annotated ratio of the background tends to be much smaller than that of the foreground classes. The imbalance of annotated ratio further enhances the di ffi culty of π estimation. 

3.3.2. Estimation of class mixture ratios 

To mitigate under-segmentation in scribble-supervised learn-ing, we estimate the class mixture ratios of the unlabeled pixels. Let π = [π1, . . . , π m] denote the class prior over unlabeled pix-els, where πk = pu(ck). 

Objective: Given nu unlabeled pixels x = [x1, . . . , xnu ] sampled from pu(x), we estimate π by maximizing the marginal likeli-hood of unlabeled observations: 

L(π) =

> nu

∏

> i=1

pu(xi) =

> nu

∏

> i=1



> m

∑

> k=1

pu(xi | ck) pu(ck)

 .

We assume that labeled and unlabeled pixels share the same class-conditional appearance distribution (Assumption 1), which is standard when scribbles are sampled without bias within each class. 

Assumption 1 (Within-class density matching between labeled and unlabeled pixels) . For each class c k, we assume pℓ(x | ck) = pu(x | ck) = p(x | ck). (3) This assumption holds when scribbles are sampled at random within each class. It may be violated under habitual or non-random scribbles (e.g. always tracing only the centre lines of structures or avoiding boundary regions). Our supervision aug-mentation (random mixup and occlusion) could mitigate such biases by randomizing the spatial distribution of labeled pixels. 

EM formulation: We follow an EM procedure (Latinne et al., 8 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

> Fig. 5. Illustration of the spatial prior loss ( Lspatial ) for correction of prediction, via class mixture ratios ( π) and the spatial prior (with spatial energy).

2001; McLachlan and Krishnan, 2007) to iteratively estimate π.In the E-step, we compute the posterior responsibility of class 

ck for each unlabeled pixel xi using the current estimate π[t]. Let ˆpℓ(ck | xi) denote the network prediction (posterior) and ˆ pℓ(ck)denote the empirical class frequency on labeled pixels. Under Assumption 1, the adapted posterior for unlabeled pixels is: ˆp[t] 

> u

(ck | xi) = π[t] 

> k

ˆpℓ(ck | xi)/ ˆpℓ(ck)

∑mj=0 π[t] 

> j

ˆpℓ(c j | xi)/ ˆpℓ(c j) . (4) 

M-step: We then update the mixture ratio by averaging respon-sibilities over all unlabeled pixels: 

π[t+1]  

> k

= 1

nunu∑

> i=1

ˆp[t] 

> u

(ck | xi). (5) We initialize π[0] with the class frequency on labeled pixels, i.e., ˆ pℓ(ck) = nk 

> ℓ

/nℓ, and alternate Eq. (4) and Eq. (5) until con-vergence. Appendix ?? provides the complete-data likelihood, the Q-function, and the derivation of Eq. (4). 

Discussion: There are two conditions of the proposed algo-rithm. Firstly, we assume the within-class probabilities of la-beled and unlabeled pixels be the same, which means the la-beled pixels should be randomly sampled based on classes. Sec-ondly, π is initiated with the class frequency of labeled pixels. Since the annotated ratio of background is smaller than that of the foreground classes, the priori probabilities of foreground classes within unlabeled pixels tend to be over-estimated. The first problem can be tackled by modeling the e ffi cient scribbles, to achieve the random distribution of annotations. For the sec-ond problem, by randomly occluding the image and replacing the occluded area with background, we are able to increase the ratio of background and alleviate this problem to some extent. Furthermore, we propose to address it with the marginal prob-ability maximization, which will be explained in Section 3.3.4. Note that classical PU learning are primarily designed for bi-nary settings and assume sample-wise independence. In our setting, the output space is multi-class, and the unlabeled set consists of densely correlated pixels within an image. Corre-spondingly, existing PU learning methods for classication task cannot be directly used for multi-class segmentation. In this work, we adapt a PU-learning method nnPU (Kiryo et al., 2017) to the multi-class segmentation scenario and compare our ap-proach with nnPU. Specifically, positive samples of each class are distinguished from unlabeled pixels. And then we maximize the marginal probability of negative samples. 

3.3.3. Computation of spatial energy 

Given the estimated class mixture ratios, we aim to identify the unlabeled pixels by determining the probability of pixels belonging to each class. Instead of using model predictions di-rectly, we further encode the spatial relationship to compensate the inaccurate results generated by segmentation network. In-spired by Obukhov et al. (2019a), we estimate the spatial energy of unlabeled pixels with energy term in a dense setting. Firstly, we use Gaussian kernels Gi j to measure the distance between pixels at position i and j as: 

Gi j = exp 

− (pi − p j)2

2σ2

> p

− (oi − o j)2

2σ2

> o

 , (6) where pi represents the position of pixel xi; oi denotes the in-tensity feature; σp and σo are the bandwidth parameters for position and intensity information, respectively. The shallow features like intensity and position are specific to the pixel and do not rely on the network prediction. Then, the energy term 

ϕi j leveraging prediction ˆ y is formulated as: 

ϕi j (ˆ y) = Gi j ˆyi ˆy j,

which denotes the pairwise relationship between two pixels. This energy term connects every pixels with each other within one image. Based on ϕi, j, we define the element of spatial en-ergy Φ in a dense setting, i.e. ,

Φi(ˆ y) =

∑

> j∈Ωi

ϕi j (ˆ y), (7) K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 9

where Ωi = {Pos( i) − Pos( j) ≤ r}, means the neighborhood window of radius r. Instead of taking the total energy as the regularization loss as (Obukhov et al., 2019a), we consider Φ

as the spatial energy to reflect the relative probability of pixels belonging to each class. 

3.3.4. Spatial prior and shape regularization losses 

The spatial prior loss is computed by ranking the spatial en-ergy and selecting the top π proportion of pixels as the segmen-tation. Considering that adjusting multiple structures directly can be challenging, we instead separate each foreground class from the others, and then tackle the individual structure. Given that the mixture ratios of foreground classes tend to be over-estimated, we instead leverage the accurate negative pixels fil-tered by estimated mixture ratios, and maximize the marginal probability of these pixels belonging to other classes. Firstly, by ranking the spatial energy and applying the mix-ture ratio of each class, we are able to distinguish negative pix-els from unlabeled pixels. For foreground class ck, we rank the unlabeled pixels according to the spatial energy Φk of class ck

in Eq. (7). Given the estimated mixture ratio πk, we set pixels in the top πk proportion to be positive samples Ωk. Correspond-ingly, the remaining pixels are taken as negative pixels, denoted as ¯ Ωk. Taking over-estimated πk into account, we believe the set of negative pixels ¯ Ωk is more accurate than Ωk.Secondly, we design the spatial prior loss ( Lspatial ) based on maximal marginal probability of negative samples ¯ Ωk belong-ing to other classes. For each class ck, we take it as foreground and fuse other classes except ck into background. The fused class is denoted as ¯ ck. For pixel xi in ¯ Ωk, its marginal probabil-ity belonging to ¯ ck equals the sum of probabilities of the fused classes, i.e. , ˆ p(¯ ck|xi, xi ∈ ¯Ωk) = ∑mk′=1[1[k′,k] ˆp(ck|xi)]. To maxi-mize the marginal probability of negative pixel xi belonging to ¯ck, we formulate the spatial prior loss as: 

Lspatial = −

> m

∑

> k=1

∑ 

> xi∈¯Ωk

log( ˆ p (¯ ck|xi)) . (8) Our construction involves selecting a fixed-coverage pixel subset via sorting, which is di ff erent of region-selection mechanisms used in perturbation-based explanation meth-ods (Fong Ruth, 2017; Fong et al., 2019). However, un-like Fong Ruth (2017); Fong et al. (2019) we do not optimize a perturbation mask nor aim at post-hoc interpretability. In-stead, we rank a class-wise spatial energy map and use the es-timated mixture ratio πk to define class-specific sets, then reg-ularize predictions through a probabilistic constraint to reduce under-segmentation under sparse scribble supervision. 

The shape regularization loss . Due to insu ffi cient supervision of scribbles, the network often produces multiple disconnected regions. To mitigate this problem, we propose Lshape to regu-larize the inter-connectivity within the structure. Di ff erent with the spatial prior loss, which constrains the size of the structure and the correlation between pixels. We adopt Lshape to further reduce noise and smooth boundary. It requires the model pre-diction to be consistent with its maximum connected area, and minimizes their cross entropy loss, i.e. ,

> Table 1. Summary of hyper-parameters used in the proposed training losses.

Notations Description 

λ1 Weight of the global consistency loss Lglobal .

λ2 Weight of the spatial prior loss Lspatial .

λ3 Weight of the shape regularization loss Lshape .

sb Side length of the occlusion mask in 1b.

σp Position bandwidth of Gaussian kernel in Eq. 6. 

σo Intensity bandwidth of Gaussian kernel in Eq. 6. 

r Neighborhood radius used in Eq. 7. 

Ewarm Warm-up epochs before enabling Lspatial .   

> Lshape =−
> ∑
> k∈Ψ
> F( ˆ Yk) log( ˆ Yk),(9)

where Ψ is the set of label classes with inter-connected struc-tures; F(·) denotes the morphological function, and outputs the largest inter-connected area of input label. For targets that nat-urally contain multiple non-connected regions (e.g., multifocal lesions), Lshape should be disabled for the corresponding class, because the morphological operation F(·) would remove valid target regions. 

3.4. ZScribbleNet 

ZScribbleSeg is achieved via a deep neural network referred to as ZScribbleNet. Our goal is to develop a learning frame-work for scribble supervision by e ffi ciently modeling scribbles and correcting network predictions via prior regularization. The proposed method does not depend on particular network archi-tectures and can be directly applied to any segmentation back-bone. To demonstrate the e ff ectiveness of our method while decoupling it from architectural improvements, we adopted the UNet (Baumgartner et al., 2017) as the backbone for all exper-iments. As Figure 2 shows, two images are mixed together to perform the supervision augmentation. Then, our ZScribbleNet takes the mixed images and unmixed images as the input, and output their segmentation results. For model training, images and their scribble annotations are sampled to estimate the training objective ( L), which is formu-lated as: 

L = Lpce + λ1Lglobal + λ2Lspatial + λ3Lshape 

︸ ︷︷ ︸

> unsup

, (10) where Lpce is the partial cross entropy loss calculated for annotated pixels in unmixed image and mixed image. The global consistency loss Lglobal in Eq.(2) requires the mix equiv-alence for the supervision augmentation. The spatial prior loss 

Lspatial in Eq.(8) encodes the π prior and spatial prior; shape regularization loss Lshape in Eq.(9) leverages shape constraint. 

λ1, λ 2, λ 3 are hyper-parameters to leverage the relative impor-tance of di ff erent loss components. Table 1 summarized the hyper-parameters used in our method. At the beginning of training, the prediction results of the model could be inaccurate, which would introduce noise to the 10 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

estimation of class mixture ratios π and spatial energy. There-fore, we warmly started training the networks with partial cross entropy loss Lpce , global consistency loss Lglobal , and shape reg-ularization loss Lshape for 100 epochs, and then invoked the spa-tial loss Lspatial .In the testing phase, the trained network predicted the seg-mentation results of input image directly. 

4. Experiments and Results 

We first introduce the materials used in our study, includ-ing four segmentation tasks, datasets, and evaluation protocols (Section 4.1). Then, we investigate a variety of scribble forms and analyze the principles of e ffi cient scribbles (Section 4.2). Next, we perform an ablation study to assess the contribution of each component in the proposed ZScribbleSeg framework (Section 4.3). Finally, we compare ZScribbleSeg with state-of-the-art methods across diverse segmentation tasks using four open datasets (Section 4.4). 

4.1. Materials 4.1.1. Tasks and datasets 

Our validation covered four representative segmentation tasks: (1) cardiac ventricular segmentation of regular structures from anatomical MRI (ACDC) and abdomen organ structure segmentation from CT (BTCV), (2) regular structure segmen-tation from pathology-enhanced imaging with limited training samples (MSCMRseg), (3) irregular myocardial pathology seg-mentation (MyoPS) and brain tumor segmentation (Decathlon-BrainTumor)from multi-modality MRI (MyoPS), and (4) 3D prostate segmentation from multi-modality MRI (Decathlon). 

ACDC dataset was from the MICCAI17 Automatic Cardiac Diagnosis Challenge Bernard et al. (2018). This dataset con-sists of short-axis cardiac images using anatomical MRI se-quence (BSSFP) from 100 patients, with gold standard segmen-tation of cardiac ventricular structures, including left ventricle blood cavity (LV), left ventricle myocardium (MYO), and right ventricle blood cavity (RV). For experiments, we randomly di-vided the 100 subjects into a training set of 70 subjects, a vali-dation set of 15 subjects (particularly for ablation study), and a test set of 15 subjects. 

MSCMRseg was from the MICCAI19 Multi-sequence Car-diac MR Segmentation Challenge (Zhuang, 2019b, 2016), con-sisting of images from 45 patients with cardiomyopathy and the gold standard segmentation of LV, MYO and RV. We em-ployed the 45 images of late gadolinium enhanced (LGE) MRI to evaluate the segmentation of ventricle structures. Follow-ing Yue et al. (2019), we divided the 45 images into three sets of 25 (training), 5 (validation), and 15 (test) images for all ex-periments. Note that this structure segmentation is more chal-lenging than that on ACDC due to its smaller training set and pathology enhanced images. 

MyoPS dataset was from MICCAI’20 Myocardial pathology segmentation Challenge (Li et al., 2022), consisting of paired images of BSSFP, LGE and T2 cardiac MRI from 45 patients. The task was to segment the myocardial pathologies, including scar and edema, which do not have regular shape or structure thus their segmentation represents a di ff erent task to the regu-lar structure segmentation. Following the benchmark study (Li et al., 2022), we split the data into 20 pairs of training set, 5 pairs of validation set and 20 pairs of test set. 

Decathlon-Prostate dataset was released by the Decathlon challenge (Antonelli et al., 2022). The organizers released 32 paired MRI 3D volumes of two series, including transverse T2-weighted and the apparent di ff usion coe ffi cient (ADC). The ground truth segmentation of central gland and peripheral zone were also provided along with the images. We excluded two cases with missing labels of peripheral zones and split the re-maining 30 paired volumes into three sets of 18(training), 6(val-idation) and 6(test). To avoid the deviation caused by random dataset division, we conducted 5-fold cross-validation and re-ported the average performance on test set. 

Decathlon-BrainTumor dataset consists of 750 multiparametric-magnetic resonance images from patients diagnosed with either glioblastoma or lower-grade glioma (An-tonelli et al., 2025). The Decathlon-BrainTumor dataset contains the same cases as the 2016 and 2017 Brain Tumor Segmentation (BraTS) challenges. They have a uniform resolution with a size of 240 × 240 × 155. We aimed to segment two foreground classes: the tumor core and the peritumoral edema. The dataset was randomly split into 80%, 10% and 10% for training, validation and testing, respectively. 

BTCV dataset comprises 47 abdominal CT acquired at the Vanderbilt University Medical Center from metastatic liver can-cer patients or post-operative ventral hernia patients Landman et al. (2015). We aimed to segment three organs: the liver, spleen and stomach. Same as Decathlon-BrainTumor dataset, the BTCV dataset was randomly split into 80%, 10% and 10% for training, validation and testing, respectively. 

4.1.2. Evaluation metrics 

For each task, we reported the Dice score and Hausdor ff Dis-tance (HD) on each foreground class separately. 

4.1.3. Pre-processing and implementation 

The two dimensional slices from ACDC and MSCMR datasets were of di ff erent resolutions. Hence, we first re-sampled all images into a fixed resolution of 1 .37 × 1.37 mm and then extracted the central patch of size 212 × 212 for exper-iments. For MyoPS, we took the paired slices of BSSFP, LGE, and T2 CMR and cropped their center patches of size 192 × 192 for experiments. For Prostate-Decathlon, we re-sampled all vol-umes to the resolution of 1 .1 × 1.1 × 1.1 mm. We then cropped 64 × 64 × 64 center patches for each volume and take a paired patches of T2 and ADC sequences as an input. We normal-ized the intensity of these medical images to be zero mean and unit variance. For BTCV dataset, we resampled all images into a fixed resolution of 1 .2 × 1.2 mm and resized the images to 256 × 256. For Decathlon-BrainTumor dataset, we used the original image resolution for our experiments. For random occlusion, a square area of 32 ×32 was randomly occluded for each image. For the estimation of spatial energy, We adopted Gaussian kernels with intensity bandwidth σo =

0.1, position bandwidth σp = 6, and kernel radius r = 5. The K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 11                  

> Table 2. E ffi ciency analysis of scribble forms for regular structure segmentation of cardiac ventricles (ACDC dataset) and irregular segmentation of myocardial pathology (MyoPS dataset). Here, Nscribble and Npix respectively denote the number of manual draws to generate scribble annotations and number of annotated pixels, which indicate annotation e ff orts; d={dk}mk=1is the number of manual draws (scribbles) and nl={nkl}mk=1is the given threshold of annotation e ff orts (number of labeled pixels), where dk<< nklfor each class k. Segmentation results are evaluated on test set and reported in Dice scores.

Methods Nscribble Npix 

Structural segmentation Irregular segmentation LV MYO RV Avg Scar Edema Avg Skeleton d nl .805 ±.145 .737 ±.095 .769 ±.128 .770 ±.126 .504 ±.213 .057 ±.022 .281 ±.271 Random walk d nl .798 ±.173 .698 ±.153 .753 ±.157 .744 ±.165 .516 ±.284 .529 ±.123 .522 ±.184 DirRandomWork d nl .844 ±.143 .755 ±.102 .798 ±.173 .799 ±.146 .539 ±.217 .637 ±.108 .588 ±.176 Points nl nl .876 ±.134 .801 ±.089 .858 ±.081 .845 ±.107 .551 ±.246 .638 ±.115 .595 ±.194          

> (a) (b) (c) (d)
> Fig. 6. Performance of segmentation networks trained using partial cross entropy computed from Points scribble form with di ff erent number of pixels
> Npix , with comparisons to fully supervised models (FullSupUNet): (a) and (c) visualize Dice scores with respect to di ff erent Npix on ACDC and MyoPS, respectively. The performance of models trained by the Random walk form, with increasing step length l, compared with models trained by DirRandWalk: (b) and (d) show the Dice scores of segmentation on ACDC and MyoPS, respectively, given Npix =nl.

hyper-parameters λ1, λ2, λ3 in Eq. (10) were empirically set to be 0 .05, 1, and 1, respectively. All models were trained with a batch size of 4, learning rate of 1e −4, and augmentation of flipping and random rotation. We implemented our models with Pytorch. All models were trained on one NVIDIA 3090Ti 24GB GPU for 1000 epochs. 

4.2. E ffi ciency of scribble forms 

In this study, we first compared four scribble forms to illus-trate the e ffi cacy of randomly annotated scribbles for supervi-sion. Denoting the number of annotated pixels using a manual and skeleton-wise scribble form as n, we generated other scrib-ble forms with the same annotated ratios for a fair comparison. Then, we studied the performance of segmentation with respect to the number of pixels annotated using a random and wide range scribble form, by setting the number of annotated pixels to di ff erent times of n. Finally, we further explored variants of random walk annotations to show the importance of wide range in the random distribution of scribbles. We applied two segmentation tasks, i.e., regular structure segmentation of the cardiac ventricles on ACDC dataset and irregular segmentation of myocardial pathologies using MyoPS dataset. To compare the supervision of scribble forms directly, we trained all models with partial cross entropy (PCE) loss cal-culated for annotated pixels from scribbles. All experiment re-sults were reported on the test set. 

4.2.1. Scribble forms 

Annotation e ff ort can be assessed in two ways. One is the number of manual draws used to create scribbles ( Nscribble ), and the other is the number of annotated pixels ( Npix ). Given the cer-tain amount of e ff orts, we designed four forms following di ff er-ent generation procedures, including (1) Skeleton, (2) Random walk, (3) Directed random walk (DirRandomWalk), (4) Points. The details of scribble forms are described bellow. 

Skeleton indicates the widely adopted scribble form by a an-notator, who approximately outlines the shape of each label class within the segmentation mask. For a segmentation task with m label classes, one needs d manual draws (scribbles) for a training image, where d = {dk}mk=1 and dk ≥ 1 denotes the num-ber of manual draws for label class k. For ACDC dataset, we adopted the manual annotated skeleton scribble released by Val-vano et al. (2021). 

Random walk starts from a random point within the seg-mentation mask. Then, the annotation moves along a random direction of image lattice within the segmentation mask with a given step length ( l by default set to 1). We repeated such moves until the ratio or number of annotated pixels reached a threshold ( nl). 

Directed random walk (DirRandomWalk) is a variant of the random walk with momentum. Scribbles generated by the stan-dard random walk often cluster within a local region of radius √r after r steps. To promote broader coverage without manu-ally specifying the step length ( l), the directed random walk en-courages movement in the same direction as the previous step. When the next point falls outside the segmentation mask, the direction is adjusted to the nearest feasible angle. 

Points represents an idealized scribble form, where anno-tated pixels are randomly sampled within the segmentation mask. However, it is di ffi cult to generate such scribble annota-12 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026)  

> Table 3. Results in Dice scores and Hausdor ff Distance (HD) of the ablation study using ACDC dataset, where the models were evaluated on the validation set. Note that model #8 is ZScribbleSeg. Bold denotes the best result, and underline indicates the best but one in each category.

Dice Lpce 

Effi ciency Lglobal Lshape 

Lspatial LV MYO RV Avg Mix Occlusion π spatial model #1 ✓ × × × × × × .863 ±.089 .804 ±.063 .774 ±.150 .813 ±.112 model #2 ✓ ✓ × × × × × .871 ±.098 .811 ±.096 .771 ±.197 .818 ±.143 model #3 ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × × .870 ±.100 .833 ±.063 .843 ±.076 .848 ±.082 model #4 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × .920 ±.064 .868 ±.051 .886 ±.051 .891 ±.059 model #5 ✓ × × × ✓ × × .915 ±.068 .871 ±.056 .871 ±.058 .886 ±.064 model #6 ✓ × × × × ✓ × .919 ±.045 .855 ±.050 .869 ±.055 .881 ±.057 model #7 ✓ × × × × ✓ ✓ .923 ±.078 .869 ±.051 .889 ±.056 .894 ±.066 model #8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ .929 ±.057 .876 ±.051 .892 ±.049 .899 ±.056 

HD(mm) Lpce Mix Occlusion Lglobal Lshape π Lspatial LV MYO RV Avg model #1 ✓ × × × × × × 81.86 ±40.40 65.97 ±33.62 60.91 ±44.62 69.58 ±40.37 model #2 ✓ ✓ × × × × × 88.88 ±12.42 37.18 ±34.04 95.01 ±23.32 73.69 ±35.85 model #3 ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × × 119.78 ±19.14 23.90 ±17.32 52.38 ±23.40 65.35 ±45.06 model #4 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × 12.12 ±18.26 29.41 ±24.56 16.97 ±15.62 19.50 ±20.94 model #5 ✓ × × × ✓ × × 4.45 ±5.39 15.24 ±23.90 25.78 ±22.44 15.16 ±20.89 model #6 ✓ × × × × ✓ × 39.95 ±37.55 50.32 ±36.14 42.49 ±31.10 44.25 ±34.93 model #7 ✓ × × × × ✓ ✓ 28.95 ±36.57 44.77 ±34.69 7.51 ±5.34 27.08 ±32.76 model #8 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 6.09 ±8.53 11.14 ±14.53 8.86 ±5.88 8.70 ±10.40 

tion in practice, due to the huge number of manual draws which equals the number of annotated pixels, that is, Nscribble = Npix .Therefore, we considered this form as the upper bound of scrib-ble supervision under the same ratio of annotated pixels. 

4.2.2. Results 

Given the same amount of annotated pixels, we show the ef-fect of di ff erent scribble forms on regular structures (ACDC) and irregular objects (MyoPS). As Table 2 illustrates, when the four scribble forms had the same number of annotated pixels 

Npix , Points achieved the best Dice scores on both of the struc-tural segmentation and irregular segmentation tasks.This can be attributed to the e ff ects of randomness and wide range distri-bution of scribbles. However, when the annotation e ff ort was constrained by the number of manual draws, DirRandomWalk became more favorable. In this setting, the Points form was impractical despite its superior accuracy. Furthermore, Skele-ton was shown to be the least e ffi cient form. The segmentation neural network trained on such annotation performed poorly on the irregular object segmentation task. This was due to the fact that when the target was di ffi cult to outline, Skeleton form could fail to portray the entire segmentation. Such incomplete anno-tations result in poor performance or even training failure. By contrast, randomly distributed scribble forms, such as Random walk and DirRandomWalk, demonstrated clear superiority. On irregular object segmentation, they improved the average Dice score over Skeleton by 24 .1% and 30 .7%, respectively. 

Number of annotated points: By varying the number of annotated pixels ( Npix ), we validated the influence of annotated proportions on scribble-supervised segmentation. Figure 6 (a) and (c) show that the model performance improves as Npix in-creases, indicating that model training benefits from a larger proportion of annotated pixels. One can observe from Figure 6 (a) that the segmentation performance started converging when 

Npix reached 2 n. For the more di ffi cult segmentation task on irregular objects, the performance converged after Npix ≥ 4n.This trend is illustrated in Figure 6 (c). 

Wide-ranged distribution: We further investigated the in-fluence of a wide range distribution of scribbles with varying step length l in Random walk. As the step length increases, the label distribution range of Random walk gradually expanded. From Figure 6 (b) and (d), the average Dice score increased as the step length grew, and the performance gradually converged to that of DirRandomWalk. This confirmed that the widely dis-tributed scribbles were better to provide finer supervision under the same number of draws and annotated pixels. 

4.3. Ablation study 

We studied the e ff ectiveness of the proposed strategies in modeling e ffi cient scribbles and prior regularization for ZScrib-bleNet. We used the ACDC dataset and the expert-made scrib-ble annotations released by Valvano et al. (2021), and evaluated the model performance on the validation set .We consider eight ablated models trained with di ff erent set-tings. The variants progressively enable the baseline scribble loss Lpce , e ffi ciency augmentation (Mix and Occlusion), and the global consistency loss Lglobal , the shape regularization loss 

Lshape , and the spatial prior Lspatial ), where Lspatial consists of mixture-ratio estimation ( π) and a spatial energy term. For ex-ample, Model #7 corresponds to Lpce + Lspatial (i.e., enabling both π and the spatial term), while Model #8 is the full method (ZScribbleSeg). Table 3 presents the results. When model #3 incorporated the proposed supervision augmentation for e ffi cient scribble mod-eling (indicated by the E ffi ciency column), its performance im-proved over model #1. The average Dice score increased from 0.813 to 0.848, and the average HD decreased from 69.58 mm to 65.35 mm. Specifically, mixed augmentation brings a 0.5% marginal improvement (0.818 vs. 0.813). The mix operation increases the distribution range and annotation ratios, but may K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 13 

Table 4. Results and comparisons of regular structure segmentation on ACDC dataset. 

Methods Dice HD (mm) LV MYO RV Avg LV MYO RV Avg PCE .805 ±.145 .737 ±.095 .769 ±.128 .770 ±.126 62.55 ±36.04 68.30 ±27.77 59.62 ±42.62 63.40 ±35.76 WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022) .890 ±.098 .818 ±.057 .863 ±.068 .857 ±.074 39.75 ±47.27 68.80 ±49.66 31.61 ±29.93 46.72 ±42.29 GatedCRF (Obukhov et al., 2019a) .846 ±.157 .744 ±.108 .822 ±.111 .804 ±.135 37.38 ±46.37 22.30 ±15.72 20.88 ±11.85 26.85 ±30.03 MAAG (Valvano et al., 2021) .879 .817 .752 .816 25.23 26.83 22.73 24.93 CVIR (Garg et al., 2021) .866 ±.127 .797 ±.102 .737 ±.130 .800 ±.130 47.51 ±50.82 10.70 ±8.39 14.39 ±9.00 .24.20 ±34.17 nnPU (Kiryo et al., 2017) .862 ±.134 .792 ±.124 .829 ±.102 .828 ±.123 67.28 ±48.60 18.60 ±17.93 14.64 ±8.39 33.51 ±38.43 CycleMix (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a) .876 ±.096 .794 ±.083 .829 ±.099 .833 ±.098 16.60 ±19.90 18.04 ±17.78 19.09 ±21.44 17.91 ±19.57 ShapePU (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022b) .885 ±.103 .806 ±.096 .851 ±.089 .848 ±.100 20.17 ±22.40 41.81 ±33.40 20.06 ±26.43 27.35 ±29.33 TIP25 (Chen et al., 2025a) .894 ±.094 .822 ±.059 .873 ±.066 .863 ±.061 7.26 ±4.11 7.08 ±9.54 8.74 ±10.11 7.69 ±7.01 HELPNet (Zhang et al., 2025) .931 ±.043 .859 ±.057 .931 ±.041 .901 ±.034 5.80 ±3.29 2.78 ±2.16 3.92 ±6.74 3.83 ±3.48 

ScribFormer (Li et al., 2024) .880 ±.109 .794 ±.078 .894 ±.063 .856 ±.072 14.96 ±18.25 17.38 ±19.99 13.48 ±8.03 15.27 ±13.33 ZScribbleSeg .900 ±.065 .825 ±.069 .862 ±.102 .862 ±.086 7.69 ±6.94 8.93 ±6.40 12.74 ±12.48 9.79 ±9.19 FullSupUNet (Baumgartner et al., 2017) .882 ±.123 .824 ±.099 .856 ±.112 .854 ±.113 11.94 ±13.58 12.65 ±12.52 14.82 ±9.69 13.14 ±11.97 FullSup-nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) .903 ±.082 .817 ±.097 .902 ±.063 .874 ±.091 7.71 ±9.83 7.81 ±7.61 5.15 ±2.64 6.89 ±7.36 Image  Ground Truth  PCE  CVIR  nnPU  WSL4 GatedCRF  CycleMix  ShapePU  ZScribbleSeg  FullSupUNet                 

> Dice (Avg)
> :MYO :RV  Median Worst  :LV
> 0.758 0.827 0.894 0.852 0.899 0.897 0.902 0.907 0.903
> 0.486 0.390 0.472 0.628 0.618 0.386 0.607 0.773 0.544 Dice (Avg)
> Scribble FullSup-nnUNet
> 0.654
> 0.942

Fig. 7. Visualization of cardiac segmentation on ACDC dataset. The two slices were from the median and the worst cases by the average Dice scores of all compared methods. 

change the shape of target structure. Therefore, it can be di ffi -cult for the segmentation model to learn the shape prior, leading to the HD increase in some structures. This problem is allevi-ated when combined with the global consistency loss, which helps preserve the shape information. In addition, the occlusion strategy increased the average Dice score by 3.0% (0.848 vs. 0.818) by enhancing annotation diversity. When supervision augmentation was combined with the global consistency loss ( Lglobal ) in model #4, the performance was further enhanced. The average Dice score increased by 4.3% (0.891 vs. 0.848), and the average HD was reduced by more than 45 mm (19.50 mm vs. 65.35 mm). Alternatively, when inter-connectivity was enforced through the shape regu-larization loss ( Lshape ), model #5 achieved a dramatic reduction in HD, from 69.58 mm to 15.16 mm compared with model #1. We next examined the e ff ect of incorporating the spatial prior (Lspatial ) into ZScribbleNet. Model #7, which added this sin-gle loss, achieved the largest Dice improvement of 8.1% (0.894 vs. 0.813). In particular, when only the estimated class mixture ratio π was applied, model #6 still obtained a notable gain of 6.8When combined with the computed spatial energy, model #7 further improved the Dice score from 88.1% to 89.4%, and re-duced the average HD from 44.25 mm to 27.08 mm, demon-strating the e ff ectiveness of incorporating the spatial prior. Fi-nally, our ZScribbleSeg (model #8) achieved the best perfor-mance with an average Dice of 0.899 and HD of 8 .70 mm. This indicated that the combination of e ffi cient scribbles and priors endowed the algorithm with substantial supervision and prior knowledge for scribble-supervised segmentation. 

4.4. Performance and Comparisons 

We conducted experiments over the six segmentation tasks stated in Section 4.1. (1) For the structural segmentation of cardiac ventricles from ACDC dataset, we used the expert-made scribbles released by Valvano et al. (2021). (2) For the cardiac structural segmentation from pathology enhanced imaging (MSCMRseg) dataset, we used the manually anno-tated scribbles released by Zhang and Zhuang (2022a). (3) For the irregular myocardial pathology segmentation from MyoPS dataset, we first adopted the standard skeletonization algorithm for the simulated scribble annotation of pathologies Rajchl et al. (2017). Then, we manually annotated skeleton scribbles for the structures of LV, Myo, RV and background. (4) For the 3D Prostate-Decathlon dataset, we randomly select about 3-5 slices for each category in each dimension to manually label scribbles. (5) For Decathlon-BrainTumor and BTCV, we gen-erated pseudo-scribbles on axial slices using a script designed to imitate human drawing behavior (Luo et al., 2022). We compared ZScribbleSeg with thirteen methods. We first implemented the PCE loss ( Lpce ) as a baseline method (re-ferred to PCE). We reported results of state-of-the-art scribble-supervised methods, including HELPNet (Zhang et al., 2025), TIP25 (Chen et al., 2025a), ScribFormer (Li et al., 2024), WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022), GatedCRF (Obukhov et al., 2019a), CycleMix (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a), and ShapePU (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022b). MAAG (Valvano et al., 2021) was in-cluded on ACDC with results taken from the original pa-per. Note that for the MSCMRSeg dataset, the test sets used 14 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

Table 5. Results and comparisons of regular structure segmentation on pathology enhanced images (LGE CMR) using MSCMRseg dataset. Note that the results of HELPNet and ScribFormer are taken from their original papers, and it can be di ffi cult to conduct a fair cross-study comparison due to the di ff erences in training strategies and hardware environments. 

Methods Dice HD (mm) LV MYO RV Avg LV MYO RV Avg PCE .514 ±.078 .582 ±.067 .058 ±.023 .385 ±.243 259.4 ±14.19 228.1 ±21.36 257.4 ±12.43 248.3 ±21.63 WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022) .902 ±.040 .815 ±.033 .828 ±.101 .848 ±.076 55.95 ±4.88 42.07 ±13.48 32.08 ±6.57 43.37 ±31.04 GatedCRF (Obukhov et al., 2019a) .917 ±.044 .825 ±.032 .848 ±.073 .863 ±.066 25.72 ±4.37 37.92 ±5.10 32.83 ±5.59 32.16 ±7.11 CVIR (Garg et al., 2021) .331 ±.076 .371 ±.088 .404 ±.110 .368 ±.095 259.2 ±14.23 243.0 ±13.76 180.9 ±55.44 227.7 ±47.63 nnPU (Kiryo et al., 2017) .341 ±.067 .538 ±.081 .432 ±.100 .437 ±.115 259.4 ±14.19 201.6 ±66.98 199.7 ±57.50 220.2 ±57.70 CycleMix (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a) .748 ±.064 .730 ±.047 .835 ±.041 .771 ±.069 224.59 ±35.27 28.26 ±20.77 73.36 ±51.39 108.74 ±92.65 ShapePU (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022b) .880 ±.046 .785 ±.080 .833 ±.087 .833 ±.082 178.02 ±50.93 178.05 ±25.39 189.35 ±55.78 181.81 ±45.27 TIP25 (Chen et al., 2025a) .901 ±.054 .823 ±.087 .873 ±.091 .866 ±.083 23.33 ±26.28 25.42 ±27.60 30.60 ±37.23 26.45 ±23.67 

HELPNet (Zhang et al., 2025) .932 ±.040 .861 ±.040 .896 ±.040 .896 - - - -ScribFormer (Li et al., 2024) .896 .807 .813 .839 - - - -ZScribbleSeg .922 ±.039 .834 ±.039 .854 ±.055 .870 ±.058 12.10 ±14.70 16.52 ±19.14 51.03 ±39.27 26.55 ±31.39 FullSupUNet (Baumgartner et al., 2017) .909 ±.049 .821 ±.054 .826 ±.087 .852 ±.076 10.02 ±12.36 11.89 ±11.34 56.91 ±41.99 26.27 ±33.63 FullSup-nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) .940 ±.034 .880 ±.027 .902 ±.047 .907 ±.044 9.10 ±17.10 10.57 ±11.81 11.36 ±11.50 10.34 ±13.76 Image  Ground Truth  PCE  CVIR  nnPU                    

> ShapePU
> WSL4 GatedCRF CycleMix ShapePU ZScribbleSeg FullSupUNet
> Dice (Avg)
> :MYO :RV  Median Worst  :LV
> 0.389 0.353 0.412 0.886 0.885 0.787 0.865 0.893 0.880
> 0.370 0.328 0.428 0.723 0.814 0.735 0.723 0.829 0.830
> Scribble
> Dice (Avg)
> FullSup-nnUNet
> 0.916
> 0.928

Fig. 8. Visualization of cardiac segmentation on LGE CMR using MSCMRseg dataset. The two slices were from the median and the worst cases by the average Dice scores of all compared methods. Table 6. Results and comparisons of regular structure segmentation on BTCV dataset. 

Methods Dice HD (mm) Spleen Liver Stomach Avg Spleen Liver Stomach Avg PCE .384 ±.091 .855 ±.021 .725 ±.081 .655 ±.226 213.93 ±17.98 68.61 ±19.89 100.68 ±31.85 127.74 ±15.18 WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022) .584 ±.091 .920 ±.015 .818 ±.059 .774 ±.037 115.58 ±19.81 31.50 ±10.33 49.64 ±24.89 65.67 ±12.01 GatedCRF (Obukhov et al., 2019b) .608 ±.095 .919 ±.021 .825 ±.060 .783 ±.042 109.10 ±20.14 44.97 ±20.93 35.49 ±39.91 63.21 ±14.23 CVIR (Garg et al., 2021) .596 ±.072 .829 ±.046 .724 ±.099 .716 ±.058 112.96 ±36.4 77.88 ±25.96 102.56 ±30.04 97.80 ±26.05 nnPU (Kiryo et al., 2017) .557 ±.101 .915 ±.027 .809 ±.063 .760 ±.045 128.65 ±19.25 34.76 ±15.05 75.59 ±21.45 79.67 ±18.56 CycleMix (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a) .738 ±.074 .922 ±.097 .823 ±.091 .827 ±.095 89.09 ±16.72 29.35 ±12.88 32.52 ±21.39 50.32 ±19.63 ShapePU Zhang and Zhuang (2022b) .745 ±.092 .926 ±.067 .819 ±.076 .830 ±.081 76.09 ±25.45 25.29 ±10.18 48.43 ±24.23 49.94 ±23.12 TIP25 (Chen et al., 2025a) .780 ±.066 .932 ±.080 .837 ±.075 .850 ±.073 49.88 ±10.73 20.15 ±13.28 22.82 ±15.31 30.95 ±14.22 HELPNet (Zhang et al., 2025) .796 ±.045 .940 ±.088 .842 ±.090 .859 ±.075 36.48 ±9.43 18.97 ±5.34 21.31 ±8.27 25.59 ±8.42 ScribFormer (Li et al., 2024) .752 ±.175 .930 ±.212 .821 ±.370 .834 ±.379 62.54 ±13.87 21.97 ±10.34 33.38 ±15.27 39.30 ±14.57 ZScribbleSeg .784 ±.034 .947 ±.012 .839 ±.066 .856 ±.080 38.39. ±4.30 12.17 ±6.83 17.72 ±5.35 22.76 ±6.32 

FullSupUNet (Baumgartner et al., 2017) .825 ±.046 .961 ±.032 .867 ±.044 .884 ±.076 23.72 ±5.44 4.31 ±1.33 10.81 ±6.46 12.95 ±6.10 FullSup-nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) .838 ±.039 .968 ±.045 .875 ±.069 .893 ±.062 19.46 ±4.89 4.24 ±0.98 10.25 ±4.46 11.31 ±5.19 

Table 7. Results and comparisons of irregular segmentation of myocardial pathologies on MyoPS dataset. 

Methods Dice HD (mm) Scar Edema Avg Scar Edema Avg PCE 0.504 ±0.213 0.057 ±0.022 0.281 ±0.271 82.68 ±33.95 147.61 ±20.59 115.15 ±43.00 WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022) - - - - - -GatedCRF (Obukhov et al., 2019b) - - - - - -CVIR (Garg et al., 2021) 0.505 ±0.214 0.080 ±0.031 0.293 ±0.263 61.59 ±32.09 125.27 ±20.83 93.43 ±41.86 nnPU (Tarvainen and Valpola, 2017) 0.530 ±0.241 0.085 ±0.035 0.308 ±0.282 48.88 ±23.55 125.27 ±20.83 87.07 ±44.47 CycleMix (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a) 0.550 ±0.237 0.626 ±0.124 0.588 ±0.191 65.64 ±42.81 81.97 ±40.87 73.81 ±42.13 ShapePU (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022b) 0.558 ±0.237 0.615 ±0.144 0.587 ±0.205 57.33 ±31.58 53.00 ±31.42 55.16 ±31.17 TIP25 (Chen et al., 2025a) 0.603 ±0.175 0.652 ±0.141 0.628 ±0.193 49.29 ±20.31 50.23 ±22.56 49.76 ±21.44 HELPNet (Zhang et al., 2025) 0.611 ±0.204 0.655 ±0.147 0.633 ±0.186 45.89 ±20.12 47.74 ±21.34 46.82 ±20.89 

ScribFormer (Li et al., 2024) 0.571 ±0.266 0.648 ±0.190 0.610 ±0.228 50.55 ±19.09 51.28 ±24.21 50.92 ±21.65 ZScribbleSeg 0.596 ±0.237 0.676 ±0.113 0.636 ±0.188 46.73 ±20.04 47.05 ±24.30 46.89 ±21.98 FullSupUNet (Baumgartner et al., 2017) 0.607 ±0.253 0.659 ±0.135 0.633 ±0.202 55.35 ±35.73 63.53 ±33.15 59.44 ±34.27 FullSup-nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) 0.610 ±0.169 0.651 ±0.246 0.630 ±0.209 33.89 ±14.00 32.55 ±17.88 33.22 ±15.87 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 15 Ground Truth  PCE  CVIR  nnPU  ShapePU CycleMix  ZScribbleSeg  FullSupUNet  

> Dice (Scar);
> Dice (Edema)
> 0.488;
> 0.039
> 0.478;
> 0.054
> 0.667;
> 0.062
> 0.591;
> 0.597
> 0.558;
> 0.616
> 0.671;
> 0.637
> Median cases  :Scar  :Edema +( )
> Dice (Scar);
> Dice (Edema)
> 0.563;
> 0.042
> 0.564;
> 0.061
> 0.677;
> 0.059
> 0.726;
> 0.684
> 0.707;
> 0.698
> 0.755;
> 0.750
> Image Scribble
> 0.705;
> 0.686
> 0.716;
> 0.713
> FullSup-nnUNet
> 0.705;
> 0.686
> 0.716;
> 0.7
> 0.798;
> 0.635
> 0.735;
> 0.668

Fig. 9. Visualization of irregular segmentation of myocardial pathologies on MyoPS dataset. The two slices were from the median cases by average Dice scores of edema or scar segmentation of all compared methods. Table 8. Results and comparisons of irregular structure segmentation using Decathlon-BrainTumor dataset. 

Methods Dice HD (mm) Tumor Edema Avg Tumor Edema Avg PCE 0.683 ±0.215 0.569 ±0.312 0.626 ±0.288 89.84 ±42.16 68.13 ±31.54 78.99 ±38.86 WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022) 0.709 ±0.235 0.669 ±0.167 0.689 ±0.188 76.29 ±31.24 63.28 ±27.23 69.79 ±28.34 GatedCRF (Obukhov et al., 2019a) 0.713 ±0.244 0.670 ±0.297 0.692 ±0.284 74.38 ±29.24 60.51 ±21.60 67.45 ±25.36 CVIR (Garg et al., 2021) 0.720 ±0.265 0.667 ±0.343 0.694 ±0.279 71.15 ±38.43 59.42 ±24.30 65.29 ±28.41 nnPU (Kiryo et al., 2017) 0.708 ±0.350 0.648 ±0.389 0.678 ±0.364 80.49 ±34.27 66.29 ±26.70 73.39 ±29.16 CycleMix (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a) 0.741 ±0.389 0.711 ±0.236 0.726 ±0.253 38.56 ±25.82 37.55 ±21.57 38.10 ±23.88 ShapePU (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022b) 0.750 ±0.296 0.712 ±0.236 0.731 ±0.272 33.29 ±19.42 30.16 ±17.57 31.73 ±18.13 TIP25 (Chen et al., 2025a) 0.784 ±0.077 0.724 ±0.078 0.754 ±0.081 21.82 ±13.94 21.88 ±10.45 21.85 ±12.64 HELPNet (Zhang et al., 2025) 0.811 ±0.054 0.734 ±0.086 0.772 ±0.077 20.69 ±12.66 19.57 ±9.10 20.13 ±10.98 

ScribFormer (Li et al., 2024) 0.773 ±0.086 0.720 ±0.109 0.747 ±0.090 27.28 ±9.38 24.81 ±14.83 26.05 ±13.22 ZScribbleSeg 0.788 ±0.089 0.737 ±0.098 0.763 ±0.098 24.28 ±12.13 19.91 ±8.14 22.10 ±10.67 FullSupUNet (Baumgartner et al., 2017) 0.803 ±0.097 0.821 ±0.156 0.812 ±0.112 21.34 ±4.87 12.38 ±5.63 16.86 ±5.38 FullSup-nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) 0.816 ±0.078 0.829 ±0.218 0.823 ±0.191 18.87 ±5.69 11.01 ±4.67 14.94 ±4.97 

by HELPNet and ScribFormer are the same as ours. There-fore, we also report the results of their original papers. Fur-thermore, we considered semi-supervised methods based on positiveunlabeled learning, namely CVIR (Garg et al., 2021) and nnPU (Kiryo et al., 2017). We re-implemented both for scribble-supervised segmentation. Finally, we trained UNet and nnUNet with full annotations as the baselines of fully-supervised approach (referred to as FullSupUNet and FullSup-nnUNet, respectively). For the details of compared methods, please refer to the Section 2 of the supplementary materials. 

4.4.1. Structure segmentation from anatomical images 

Table 5 presents the Dice and HD results of 11 approaches for regular structure segmentation of cardiac ventricles from ACDC dataset. One can observe that ZScribbleSeg achieved an average Dice of 0.862, while TIP25, HELPNet, and Scrib-Former obtained higher Dice scores of 0.863, 0.901, and 0.856, respectively. We further evaluate regular abdominal organ seg-mentation on the BTCV dataset. As Table 6 shows, among all compared methods, HELPNet obtained highest average Dice (0.859) and spleen HD, while ZScribbleSeg achieved an av-erage Dice of 0.856 and the lowest average HD of 22.76 mm. Particularly, the HD results of ZScribbleSeg were better than the other methods except on the spleen. Note that HD is highly sensitive to the noisy and outlier segmentation results, which are commonly seen when the supervision of global shape infor-mation is not su ffi cient. The results indicate the proposed ef-ficient scribble modeling and prior regularization were able to alleviate the problem of inadequate supervision and incomplete shape information from training images with scribble annota-tions. Finally, Figure 7 visualizes two typical cases (median and worst) of ACDC dataset for illustration. 

4.4.2. Structure segmentation from pathology enhanced images 

The anatomical segmentation from pathology-enhanced im-ages was more challenging than that of the ACDC dataset. This is mainly because MSCMRseg provides fewer training subjects (25 vs. 70) and the LGE CMR images exhibit lower quality and more complex appearance patterns. Table 5 provides the quantitative results, and Figure 8 visu-alizes two special examples (median and worst) for demonstra-tion. ZScribbleSeg achieved promising performance with an average Dice of 0.870 and HD of 26.55 mm, which are the second best performance among all compared method. Notice that for this particular challenging task, the two general semi-supervised methods, CVIR and nnPU, failed to work properly, as evidenced by the unsuccessful segmentation examples shown in Figure 8. Finally, similar to the results in previous study (Sec-tion 4.4.1), ZScribbleSeg and FullSupUNet could achieve less noisy segmentation. This was confirmed by their substantially better HD results in Table 6. Hence, we conclude that ZScrib-bleNet benefits from substantially augmented supervision and global shape information through the proposed e ffi cient scrib-ble modeling and prior regularization. 16 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

Table 9. Results and comparisons of 3D segmentation on Decatholon Prostate dataset with 5-fold cross validation. The results were reported on the test set. 

Methods Dice HD (mm) Central gland Peripheral Zone Avg Central gland Peripheral Zone Avg PCE 0.784 ±0.138 0.535 ±0.190 0.659 ±0.213 19.85 ±15.58 25.73 ±12.72 22.79 ±15.31 WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022) - - - - - -GatedCRF Obukhov et al. (2019b) 0.776 ±0.112 0.555 ±0.177 0.666 ±0.123 31.90 ±21.82 31.41 ±117.40 31.66 ±18.43 CVIR (Garg et al., 2021) 0.780 ±0.139 0.518 ±0.222 0.649 ±0.238 15.26 ±10.37 22.93 ±9.94 19.10 ±11.17 

nnPU (Tarvainen and Valpola, 2017) 0.779 ±0.133 0.529 ±0.196 0.654 ±0.218 19.29 ±12.29 23.49 ±10.21 21.39 ±11.81 CycleMix (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022a) 0.796 ±0.159 0.583 ±0.218 0.689 ±0.229 17.31 ±15.48 21.44 ±11.47 19.37 ±14.01 ShapePU (Zhang and Zhuang, 2022b) 0.792 ±0.180 0.587 ±0.243 0.689 ±0.240 15.46 ±10.87 23.15 ±13.09 19.31 ±12.90 ZScribbleSeg 0.799 ±0.142 0.612 ±0.204 0.706 ±0.207 14.81 ±8.82 23.76 ±18.26 19.28 ±14.93 FullSupUNet (Baumgartner et al., 2017) 0.776 ±0.138 0.547 ±0.185 0.661 ±0.212 15.37 ±12.19 19.18 ±12.38 17.28 ±13.14 FullSup-nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) 0.845 ±0.095 0.607 ±0.252 0.726 ±0.225 8.57 ±2.77 19.17 ±14.25 13.87 ±11.30 CVIR  CycleMix nnPU PCE  ShapePU  ZScribbleSeg  FullSupUNet  FullSup -nnUNet Ground Truth  GatedCRF                                 

> :Central gland :Peripheral Zone
> Worst  Best
> Dice = 0.595
> Dice = 0.614
> Dice = 0.649
> Dice = 0.483
> Dice = 0.408
> Dice = 0.602
> Dice = 0.670
> Dice = 0.629
> Dice = 0.802
> Dice = 0.530
> Dice = 0.576
> Dice = 0.666
> Dice = 0.684
> Dice = 0.729
> Dice = 0.814
> Dice = 0.495
> Dice = 0.487
> Dice = 0.511
> Dice = 0.715
> Dice = 0.783
> Dice = 0.834
> Dice = 0.645
> Dice = 0.816
> Dice = 0.511
> Dice = 0.786
> Dice = 0.839
> Dice = 0.786
> Scribble
> Median
> Image

Fig. 10. Visualization of results on Prostate dataset. The selected subjects were the best, median and worst cases by the average Dice scores of all compared methods. 

4.4.3. Irregular pathology segmentation 

For segmentation of objects with heterogeneous shape fea-tures, it becomes particularly challenging to learn the accu-rate shape information for inference. We evaluated ZScribble-Seg on such challenging task of irregular segmentation using myocardial pathology segmentation (MyoPS) and Decathlon-BrainTumor datasets, where we removed the shape regulariza-tion term Lshape due to the nature of pathologies lacking such property .Table 7 presents the detailed performance results. Figure 9 further illustrates two representative cases, namely the median examples in terms of average Dice scores for edema and scar segmentation. One can find that the advantages of the pro-posed methodologies were demonstrated in such challenging task. ZScribbleSeg achieved the highest average Dice (0.636), while HELPNet and TIP25 also obtained promising perfor-mance with average Dice 0.633 and 0.628, respectively. The performance gains of ZScribbleSeg, either in terms of Dice or HD, were significant from CycleMix, ShapePU and finally to ZScribbleSeg compared to PCE, WSL4, GatedCRF, CVIR and nnPU ( p<0.001). In fact, the five compared methods failed to segment edema, and both WSL4 and GatedCRF also failed on scar segmentation. This is illustrated in the visualized exam-ples in Figure 9. Although WSL4 and GatedCRF performed well with scribble supervision in the two regular structure seg-mentation tasks, they su ff ered severely from noisy labels in this setting. Their reliance on pseudo labels made the training un-stable and led to model failure. The di ffi culty is exacerbated by the similar texture of edema and surrounding tissues across imaging modalities. Without robust estimation and regulariza-tion of class mixture ratios, accurate delineation becomes in-feasible, leading to the universal failure of the compared meth-ods. By contrast, ZScribbleSeg succeeded in this task thanks to their own methods of estimating the class prior π and apply-ing spatial regularization. This is confirmed by their averaged HD results on scar and edema, with ShapePU at 55.16 mm and ZScribbleSeg further reduced to 46.89 mm. Table 8 reports the quantitative results for tumor core and peritumoral edema seg-mentation. ZScribbleSeg achieved second best performance in terms of Dice, with an average Dice of 0.763. These results fur-ther support the robustness of the proposed framework on more challenging irregular pathology segmentation tasks. 

4.4.4. 3D Segmentation 

We generalized ZScribbleSeg to 3D cases and validated the proposed framework on the 3D Prostate segmentation (Decathlon-Prostate) sequences . Table 9 summarizes the Dice and HD results of 9 methods. Since the released code of WSL4 (Luo et al., 2022) is designed for 2D images, we did not include it for this study. The proposed ZScribbleSeg ob-tained the average Dice score of 0.726 and HD of 19.28 mm, surpassing the result of other scribble-supervised methods. We provided detailed results of compared methods on each fold in the Section 3 of the supplementary material. Figure 10 presents three typical cases, including the best, the K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 17                                                                               

> Table 10. Runtime and peak GPU memory with /without Lspatial on ACDC (2D), MyoPS (2D) and Prostate (3D). Inference time is reported per volume for per 2D image and 3D volume.
> Dataset Dim. Input Patch size Lspatial
> Train Inference Time (s /iter) Mem (GB) Time (s) Mem (GB) ACDC 2D 1-ch 212 ×212 w/o0.1423 2.658 0.0061 2.434 with 0.1689 2.671 0.0061 2.434 MyoPS 2D 3-ch 192 ×192 w/o0.1618 3.410 0.0073 2.473 with 0.1935 3.421 0.0073 2.473 Prostate 3D 1-ch 64 ×64 ×64 w/o0.4823 6.850 0.1344 4.850 with 0.5202 6.904 0.1344 4.850 10 110 010 1
> 2(weight of Lspatial )
> 0.80
> 0.82
> 0.84
> 0.86
> 0.88
> 0.90
> Dice
> (a) Sensitivity to 2
> ACDC
> MSCMR
> 13579
> r(neighborhood radius)
> 0.80
> 0.82
> 0.84
> 0.86
> 0.88
> 0.90
> Dice
> (b) Sensitivity to r
> ACDC
> MSCMR
> Fig. 11. Sensitivity analysis of key hyperparameters on ACDC and MSCMRseg. We vary the spatial prior weight λ2and the neighborhood radius r, while keeping all other settings fixed.

median, and the worst results selected by the average dice score of all compared methods. ZScribbleSeg generated segmenta-tions with more realistic shape and size than the other scribble based methods, and this advantage was particularly evident for peripheral zone segmentation. 

4.4.5. Scalability and Parameter Sensitivity Analysis 

Table 10 reports the training and inference time together with the peak GPU memory usage with and without Lspatial on two 2D datasets (ACDC and MyoPS) and one 3D dataset (Prostate). Enabling Lspatial introduces a moderate training overhead, as it requires computing the spatial energy Φ and performing local ranking and top-π selection. Specifically, the training time in-creases from 0.1423 to 0.1689 s /iter on ACDC, from 0.1618 to 0.1935 s /iter on MyoPS, and from 0.4823 to 0.5202 s /iter on Prostate. The corresponding increase in peak training memory is marginal. In contrast, inference time and memory remain un-changed across all datasets, since the Φ-based ranking is only used during training and the test-time forward pass is identical to the baseline model. Although Φ can be expressed in a dense pairwise form, in practice it is computed locally within a radius-

r neighborhood (Eq. 7), rather than over all pixel pairs. As a result, the computational complexity scales as O(N · r2) in 2D (and O(N ·r3) in 3D), where N denotes the number of pixels and 

r the neighborhood radius. Increasing r enlarges the local win-dow and thus increases the constant factor of the computation quadratically, but does not change the linear asymptotic com-plexity with respect to image size. Figure 11 further illustrates the sensitivity to the spatial prior weight λ2 and the neighbor-hood radius r on ACDC and MSCMRseg. The performance is stable across a broad range of λ2 values. Increasing r improves Dice scores initially and then saturates. 

5. Conclusion 

In this work, we proposed ZScribbleSeg, a new framework for scribble-supervised segmentation that integrates e ffi cient scribbles and prior regularization within a deep neural network (ZScribbleNet). ZScribbleSeg leverages the principles of ef-fective scribble annotations and augments scribble supervision in ZScribbleNet through mixupocclusion operations and global consistency regularization. Then, we explored to capture the global information by incorporating the prior information, par-ticularly with proposals of the spatial prior loss. This loss was based on the estimated spatial energy and label class mixture proportions π. The former provides a new means to identify the probability of unlabeled pixels belonging to each class with-out directly using model predictions; The latter was developed based on the EM algorithm and was aimed to correct the prob-lematic prediction via the regularization of the spatial prior loss. To evaluate the performance of ZScribbleSeg, we investi-gated a variety of segmentation tasks, including regular struc-tural segmentation of cardiac ventricles from anatomical imag-ing data (using ACDC dataset), regular structural segmenta-tion of pathology enhanced imaging data (MSCMRseg), irreg-ular object segmentation from multi-modality imaging (My-oPS) and 3D prostate segmentation from multi-modality imag-ing (Decathlon-Prostate). Compared with existing scribble-supervised approaches, ZScribbleSeg demonstrates superior performance. With augmented supervision and prior regular-ization, ZScribbleSeg performed reliably in challenging sce-narios. It showed strong generalizability on small training sets (MSCMRseg) and irregular structure segmentation (MyoPS), where other compared methods failed. Free-form weak annotations include points, bounding boxes, and textual descriptions in addition to scribbles. In this work, we focused solely on scribble supervision. In practice, the su-pervision may take di ff erent forms due to the variety of anno-tations that exist in hospital filing systems. Moreover, train-ing segmentation networks for rare diseases remains challeng-ing, particularly for irregular pathological objects due to the ex-tremely limited data. Hence, future work will explore supervi-sion augmentation and prior estimation for weakly supervised segmentation in rare disease scenarios. This will involve com-bining multiple forms of free-form annotations. 

Acknowledgment 

This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foun-dation of China (grant No. 62372115) Shanghai Municipal Education Commission-Artificial Intelligence Initiative to Pro-mote Research Paradigm Reform and Empower Disciplinary Advancement Plan (grant no. 24KXZNA13) Shanghai Oriental Elite Talent (YingCai) Program. 

References   

> Antonelli, M., Reinke, A., Bakas, S., Farahani, K., Kopp-Schneider, A.., Car-doso, M.J., 2025. The medical segmentation decathlon. Medical Image Analysis 102, 103572.

18 K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) Antonelli, M., Reinke, A., Bakas, S., Farahani, K., Kopp-Schneider, A., Land-man, B.A., Litjens, G., Menze, B., Ronneberger, O., Summers, R.M., et al., 2022. The medical segmentation decathlon. Nature communications 13, 4128. Asad, M., Fidon, L., Vercauteren, T., 2022. Econet: E ffi cient convolutional online likelihood network for scribble-based interactive segmentation. In-ternational Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning , 35–47. Baumgartner, C.F., Koch, L.M., Pollefeys, M., Konukoglu, E., 2017. An ex-ploration of 2d and 3d deep learning techniques for cardiac mr image seg-mentation. International Workshop on Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart , 111–119. Bekker, J., Davis, J., 2018. Estimating the class prior in positive and unla-beled data through decision tree induction. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 32. Belharbi, S., Rony, J., Dolz, J., Ayed, I.B., Mcca ff rey, L., Granger, E., 2021. Deep interpretable classification and weakly-supervised segmentation of histology images via max-min uncertainty. IEEE transactions on medical imaging 41, 702–714. Bernard, O., Lalande, A., Zotti, C., Cervenansky, F., Yang, X., Heng, P.A., Cetin, I., Lekadir, K., Camara, O., Gonzalez Ballester, M.A., Sanroma, G., Napel, S., Petersen, S., Tziritas, G., Grinias, E., Khened, M., Kollerathu, V.A., Krishnamurthi, G., Rohé, M.M., Pennec, X., Sermesant, M., Isensee, F., Jäger, P., Maier-Hein, K.H., Full, P.M., Wolf, I., Engelhardt, S., Baum-gartner, C.F., Koch, L.M., Wolterink, J.M., Igum, I., Jang, Y., Hong, Y., Patravali, J., Jain, S., Humbert, O., Jodoin, P.M., 2018. Deep learning tech-niques for automatic mri cardiac multi-structures segmentation and diagno-sis: Is the problem solved? IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 37, 2514–2525. Can, Y.B., Chaitanya, K., Mustafa, B., Koch, L.M., Konukoglu, E., Baum-gartner, C.F., 2018. Learning to segment medical images with scribble-supervision alone. Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multi-modal Learning for Clinical Decision Support Workshop . Chaitanya, K., Karani, N., Baumgartner, C.F., Becker, A., Donati, O., Konukoglu, E., 2019. Semi-supervised and task-driven data augmentation. International Conference on Information Processing in Medical Imaging , 29–41. Chen, J., Huang, W., Zhang, J., Debattista, K., Han, J., 2025a. Addressing inconsistent labeling with cross image matching for scribble-based medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 34, 842–853. Chen, Q., Lyu, H., Hu, X., Lu, Y., Hong, Y., 2025b. Volumetric medical image segmentation via scribble annotations and shape priors. Machine Vision and Applications 36, 22. Du Plessis, M., Niu, G., Sugiyama, M., 2015. Convex formulation for learn-ing from positive and unlabeled data. International Conference on Machine learning , 1386–1394. Fong, R., Patrick, M., Vedaldi, A., 2019. Understanding deep networks via extremal perturbations and smooth masks, pp. 2950–2958. Fong Ruth, Patrick M, V.A., 2017. Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful perturbation, pp. 3429–343. Gao, F., Hu, M., Zhong, M.E., Feng, S., Tian, X., Meng, X., Huang, Z., Lv, M., Song, T., Zhang, X., et al., 2022. Segmentation only uses sparse annotations: Unified weakly and semi-supervised learning in medical images. Medical Image Analysis 80, 102515. Gao, S., Zhuang, X., 2020. Robust approximations of low-rank minimization for tensor completion. Neurocomputing 379, 319–333. Garcea, F., Serra, A., Lamberti, F., Morra, L., 2023. Data augmentation for medical imaging: A systematic literature review. Computers in biology and medicine 152, 106391. Garg, S., Wu, Y., Smola, A.J., Balakrishnan, S., Lipton, Z., 2021. Mixture proportion estimation and pu learning: A modern approach. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34. Han, M., Luo, X., Xie, X., Liao, W., Zhang, S., Song, T., Wang, G., Zhang, S., 2024. Dmsps: Dynamically mixed soft pseudo-label supervision for scribble-supervised medical image segmentation. Medical Image Analysis 97, 103274. Isensee, F., Jaeger, P.F., Kohl, S.A., Petersen, J., Maier-Hein, K.H., 2021. nnu-net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation. Nature Methods 18, 203–211. Ji, Z., Shen, Y., Ma, C., Gao, M., 2019. Scribble-based hierarchical weakly supervised learning for brain tumor segmentation. International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 175– 183. Jia, Z., Huang, X., Chang, E.I.C., Xu, Y., 2017. Constrained deep weak supervi-sion for histopathology image segmentation. IEEE transactions on medical imaging 36, 2376–2388. Kervadec, H., Dolz, J., Tang, M., Granger, E., Boykov, Y., Ayed, I.B., 2019. Constrained-cnn losses for weakly supervised segmentation. Medical Image Analysis 54, 88–99. Khoreva, A., Benenson, R., Hosang, J., Hein, M., Schiele, B., 2017. Simple does it: Weakly supervised instance and semantic segmentation. IEEE Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 876–885. Kim, J., Choo, W., Jeong, H., Song, H.O., 2021. Co-mixup: Saliency guided joint mixup with supermodular diversity. International Conference on Learn-ing Representations . Kim, J.H., Choo, W., Song, H.O., 2020. Puzzle mix: Exploiting saliency and lo-cal statistics for optimal mixup. International conference on machine learn-ing , 5275–5285. Kiryo, R., Niu, G., du Plessis, M.C., Sugiyama, M., 2017. Positive-unlabeled learning with non-negative risk estimator. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30. Kohl, S., Romera-Paredes, B., Meyer, C., De Fauw, J., Ledsam, J.R., Maier-Hein, K., Eslami, S., Jimenez Rezende, D., Ronneberger, O., 2018. A prob-abilistic u-net for segmentation of ambiguous images. Advances in neural information processing systems 31. Kuang, Z., Yan, Z., Zhou, H., Yu, L., 2023. Cluster-re-supervision: Bridging the gap between image-level and pixel-wise labels for weakly supervised medical image segmentation. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Infor-matics 27, 4890–4901. Kweon, H., Yoon, S.H., Yoon, K.J., 2023. Weakly supervised semantic segmen-tation via adversarial learning of classifier and reconstructor. IEEE Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 11329–11339. Landman, B., Xu, Z., Igelsias, J., Styner, M., Langerak, T., Klein, A., 2015. Miccai multi-atlas labeling beyond the cranial vault–workshop and chal-lenge. Proc. MICCAI Multi-Atlas Labeling Beyond Cranial VaultWorkshop Challenge 5, 12. Latinne, P., Saerens, M., Decaestecker, C., 2001. Adjusting the outputs of a classifier to new a priori probabilities may significantly improve classi-fication accuracy: evidence from a multi-class problem in remote sensing. International Conference on Machine learning 1, 298–305. Li, L., Wu, F., Wang, S., Luo, X., Martin-Isla, C., Zhai, S., Zhang, J., Liu, Y., Zhang, Z., Ankenbrand, M.J., et al., 2022. Myops: A benchmark of myocardial pathology segmentation combining three-sequence cardiac mag-netic resonance images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03186 . Li, Z., Zheng, Y., Shan, D., Yang, S., Li, Q., Wang, B., Zhang, Y., Hong, Q., Shen, D., 2024. Scribformer: Transformer makes cnn work better for scribble-based medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 43, 2254–2265. Lin, L., Liu, Y., Wu, J., Cheng, P., Cai, Z., Wong, K.K., Tang, X., 2024. Fedlppa: Learning personalized prompt and aggregation for federated weakly-supervised medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 1127–1139. Lin, Y., Qu, Z., Chen, H., Gao, Z., Li, Y., Xia, L., Ma, K., Zheng, Y., Cheng, K.T., 2023. Nuclei segmentation with point annotations from pathology im-ages via self-supervised learning and co-training. Medical Image Analysis 89, 102933. Liu, J., Tan, S.Y., Yang, X., Xu, Y., Yeo, S.Y., 2025a. Eff dnet: A scribble-supervised medical image segmentation method with enhanced foreground feature discrimination. International Conference on Medical Image Com-puting and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 194–204. Liu, X., Yuan, Q., Gao, Y., He, K., Wang, S., Tang, X., Tang, J., Shen, D., 2022. Weakly supervised segmentation of covid19 infection with scribble annotation on ct images. Pattern Recognition 122, 108341. Liu, X., Zhang, J., Zhang, Y., Chen, L., Luo, L., Tang, J., 2025b. Weakly supervised segmentation of retinal layers on oct images with amd using un-certainty prototype and boundary regression. Medical Image Analysis 102, 103572. Luo, X., Hu, M., Liao, W., Zhai, S., Song, T., Wang, G., Zhang, S., 2022. Scribble-supervised medical image segmentation via dual-branch network and dynamically mixed pseudo labels supervision. International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 528– 538. McLachlan, G.J., Krishnan, T., 2007. The EM algorithm and extensions. John Wiley & Sons. Meng, Z., Zhe, X., Kang, Z., Raymond, K.y.T., 2023. Weakly supervised med-K.Zhang et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 19 ical image segmentation via superpixel-guided scribble walking and class-wise contrastive regularization. International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 137–147. Obukhov, A., Georgoulis, S., Dai, D., Gool, L.V., 2019a. Gated crf loss for weakly supervised semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04651 . Obukhov, A., Georgoulis, S., Dai, D., Van Gool, L., 2019b. Gated crf loss for weakly supervised semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04651 . Ouali, Y., Hudelot, C., Tami, M., 2020. Semi-supervised semantic segmentation with cross-consistency training. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 12674–12684. Qin, H., Jin, X., Zhu, H., Liao, H., El-Yacoubi, M.A., Gao, X., 2024. Sumix: Mixup with semantic and uncertain information. European Conference on Computer Vision , 70–88. Rajchl, M., Koch, L.M., Ledig, C., Passerat-Palmbach, J., Misawa, K., Mori, K., Rueckert, D., 2017. Employing weak annotations for medical image analysis problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06297 . Ramaswamy, H., Scott, C., Tewari, A., 2016. Mixture proportion estimation via kernel embeddings of distributions. International Conference on Machine learning , 2052–2060. Roth, H.R., Yang, D., Xu, Z., Wang, X., Xu, D., 2021. Going to extremes: weakly supervised medical image segmentation. Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction 3, 507–524. Sakai, T., Plessis, M.C., Niu, G., Sugiyama, M., 2017. Semi-supervised classifi-cation based on classification from positive and unlabeled data. International Conference on Machine learning , 2998–3006. Tajbakhsh, N., Jeyaseelan, L., Li, Q., Chiang, J.N., Wu, Z., Ding, X., 2020. Em-bracing imperfect datasets: A review of deep learning solutions for medical image segmentation. Medical Image Analysis 63, 101693. Tang, M., Perazzi, F., Djelouah, A., Ben Ayed, I., Schroers, C., Boykov, Y., 2018. On regularized losses for weakly-supervised cnn segmentation. Eu-ropean Conference on Computer Vision , 507–522. Tarvainen, A., Valpola, H., 2017. Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged consistency targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30. Valvano, G., Leo, A., Tsaftaris, S.A., 2021. Learning to segment from scribbles using multi-scale adversarial attention gates. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 40, 1990–2001. Wang, D., Zhang, Y., Zhang, K., Wang, L., 2020. Focalmix: Semi-supervised learning for 3d medical image detection. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 3951–3960. Wang, W., Sun, G., Van Gool, L., 2022. Looking beyond single images for weakly supervised semantic segmentation learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 46, 1635–1649. Wei, J., Hu, Y., Cui, S., Zhou, S.K., Li, Z., 2023. Weakpolyp: You only look bounding box for polyp segmentation. International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 757–766. Wu, F., Zhuang, X., 2022. Minimizing estimated risks on unlabeled data: A new formulation for semi-supervised medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 45, 6021–6036. Yang, J., Mehta, N., Demirci, G., Hu, X., Ramakrishnan, M.S., Naguib, M., Chen, C., Tsai, C.L., 2024. Anomaly-guided weakly supervised lesion seg-mentation on retinal oct images. Medical image analysis 94, 103139. Yue, Q., Luo, X., Ye, Q., Xu, L., Zhuang, X., 2019. Cardiac segmentation from lge mri using deep neural network incorporating shape and spatial pri-ors. International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 559–567. Yun, S., Han, D., Oh, S.J., Chun, S., Choe, J., Yoo, Y., 2019. Cutmix: Regular-ization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features. Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , 6023–6032. Zhang, B., Xiao, J., Jiao, J., Wei, Y., Zhao, Y., 2021. A ffi nity attention graph neural network for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. IEEE Trans-actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 44, 8082–8096. Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y.N., Lopez-Paz, D., 2018. mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization. International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations . Zhang, K., Zhuang, X., 2022a. Cyclemix: A holistic strategy for medical image segmentation from scribble supervision. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 11656–11665. Zhang, K., Zhuang, X., 2022b. Shapepu: A new pu learning framework regu-larized by global consistency for scribble supervised cardiac segmentation. Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention , 162–172. Zhang, P., Zhong, Y., Li, X., 2020. Accl: Adversarial constrained-cnn loss for weakly supervised medical image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00328 . Zhang, X., Wu, S., Zhang, P., Jin, Z., Xiong, X., Bu, Q., Chen, J., Feng, J., 2025. Helpnet: Hierarchical perturbations consistency and entropy-guided ensemble for scribble supervised medical image segmentation. Medical Im-age Analysis 105, 103719. Zhao, X., Wang, L., Zhang, Y., Han, X., Deveci, M., Parmar, M., 2024. Areview of convolutional neural networks in computer vision. Artificial Intel-ligence Review 57, 99. Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Lapedriza, A., Oliva, A., Torralba, A., 2016. Learning deep features for discriminative localization. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2921–2929. Zhu, J.Y., Park, T., Isola, P., Efros, A.A., 2017. Unpaired image-to-image trans-lation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. IEEE International Con-ference on Computer Vision , 2223–2232. Zhuang, X., 2016. Multivariate mixture model for cardiac segmentation from multi-sequence mri. Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted In-tervention , 2933–2946. Zhuang, X., 2019a. Multivariate mixture model for myocardial segmentation combining multi-source images. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 41, 2933–2946. Zhuang, X., 2019b. Multivariate mixture model for myocardial segmentation combining multi-source images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 41, 2933–2946. Zou, D., Cao, Y., Li, Y., Gu, Q., 2023. The benefits of mixup for feature learning. International Conference on Machine Learning , 43423–43479.