Title: TIE: Time Interval Encoding for Video Generation over Events

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.10543v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 03:24:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# TIE: Time Interval Encoding for Video Generation over Events 

Zhilei Shu 1,2,∗, Shangwen Zhu 2,3,∗, Zihang Liang 2,6, Xiaofan Li 2, Qianyu Peng 8,Xinyu Cui 7, Bo Ye 10 , Yiming Li 4, Fan Cheng 3, Jian Zhao 7, Yang Cao 1, Zheng-Jun Zha 1,†,Ruili Feng 5,2,∗

> 1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2Matrix Team, 

> 3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4Nanyang Technological University, 

> 5

University of Waterloo, 6The Pennsylvania State University, 7Zhongguancun Academy, 

> 8

The University of Hong Kong  

> ∗Equal Contribution †Corresponding Author

https://matrixteam-ai.github.io/pages/TIE 

Figure 1: Generation results with TIE . By leveraging Time Interval Encoding (TIE) , the model generates videos from structured event descriptions with explicit temporal boundaries. The examples demonstrate accurate event alignment under concurrent and overlapping event settings inaccessible to single-active-prompt baselines, including multi-entity dynamics and interleaved interactions. 

## Abstract 

Director-style prompting, robotic action prediction, and interactive video agents demand temporal grounding over concurrent events—a regime in which 68% of general clips and over 99% of robotics/gameplay clips contain overlapping events, yet existing multi-event generators rest on a single-active-prompt assumption. How-ever, modern video generators, such as Diffusion Transformers (DiT), represent time as discrete points through point-wise positional encodings. This formulation creates a fundamental dimension mismatch: temporally extended intervals and overlapping events are mathematically unrepresentable to the attention mecha-nism. Consequently, event structures collapse into ambiguous token sequences—a structural limitation that scaling alone does not directly address. In this paper, we propose Time Interval Encoding (TIE) , a principled, plug-and-play interval-aware generalization of rotary embeddings that elevates time intervals to first-class 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.10543v1 [cs.CV] 11 May 2026

primitives inside DiT cross-attention. Rather than introducing another heuristic interval embedding, we show that, within RoPE-compatible bilinear attention, TIE 

is characterized by two basic principles: Temporal Integrability , which requires an event to aggregate positional evidence over its full duration, and Duration In-variance , which removes the trivial bias toward longer intervals. Under a uniform kernel, this characterization yields an efficient closed-form sinc -based solution that preserves the standard attention interface and naturally attenuates boundary noise through interval integration. Empirically, TIE preserves the visual quality of the base DiT model while substantially improving temporal controllability. In our experiments on the OmniEvents dataset, it improves human-verified Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Rate from 77.34% to 96.03% and reduces temporal bound-ary error from 0.261s to 0.073s, while also improving trajectory-level temporal alignment metrics. TIE also remains effective under noisy timestamp perturba-tions, a key requirement for large-scale event-conditioned training where interval annotations are often automatic and imperfect, and reaches comparable visual and temporal-control quality in fewer training steps. The code and dataset are available at https://github.com/MatrixTeam-AI/TIE .

## 1 Introduction 

The landscape of video generation has undergone a paradigm shift, with Diffusion Transformers (DiT) pushing the boundaries of visual fidelity [ 23 , 32 , 20 , 21 , 42 , 27 , 2] and creative customizability [ 6, 15 , 34 , 9, 40 ]. Beyond artistic content creation, these models are increasingly envisioned as 

world simulators [12 ] for robotics [ 1] and interactive agents [ 39 , 3 , 8 , 30 ]. In robotics research, video-generation-based data synthesis [ 47 ] has emerged as a powerful tool for policy pre-training and data enrichment [ 13 , 48 ]. However, the transition from “visually pleasing” to “functionally useful” videos requires a level of temporal precision that remains elusive. For applications such as bimanual robot manipulation or multi-athlete sports analysis [ 17 ], a model must strictly adhere to the precise temporal boundaries , ordering, and overlapping of multiple interacting events. The fundamental bottleneck in achieving such precision is a representation deficit in current temporal positional encodings. While videos are continuous spatiotemporal signals, modern DiTs predominantly treat time as a sequence of discrete points . Standard rotary positional encodings (RoPE ), originally designed for text, are point-wise by nature [ 28 ]. This formulation creates a structural dimension mismatch: while real-world events (e.g., “a robot arm gripping a tool”) occupy continuous time intervals , the model processes them as if they were tied to infinitesimal timestamps. Consequently, event structures collapse into ambiguous token sequences, leading to temporal drifting and the failure of concurrent event coordination—a limitation that cannot be resolved by scaling model size alone. Moreover, in large-scale real-world video corpora, event intervals are rarely available with frame-perfect boundaries: they are often produced by VLMs, action detectors, or other automatic annotators, whose start and end times are inevitably noisy. Thus, a useful interval representation must not only encode temporal support, but also remain stable under imperfect boundary annotations. Existing works on timeline-guided synthesis [ 31 , 22 , 37 , 18 , 24 , 5 , 43 ] often assume a “single-active-prompt” constraint, where only one text prompt is valid at any given timestamp. This is insufficient for complex physical interactions where events are frequently interleaved or staggered . For instance, in a bimanual assembly task, the “reaching” phase of one arm must be precisely coordinated with the “holding” phase of the other. To bridge this gap, video generation models require an encoding mechanism that elevates time intervals to first-class primitives, allowing for a principled handling of event duration and concurrency. This paper introduces Time Interval Encoding (TIE) , a novel interval-aware formulation that explicitly models event durations and boundaries within the cross-attention mechanism. Our starting point is two basic principles: Temporal Integrability , which requires an event’s contribution to aggregate positional evidence over its full duration, and Duration Invariance , which prevents matching strength from growing trivially with interval length. We show that, within RoPE-compatible bilinear attention, these two principles characterize TIE rather than merely motivate it. Under the uniform kernel, the two principles lead to a closed-form sinc-modulated encoder ( RoTE ) that incurs zero runtime overhead over standard RoPE and reduces to RoPE in the point-wise limit r → 0. The same 2Figure 2: Video examples: Best viewed with Acrobat Reader (Also works on Foxit PDF Reader / PDF-XChange Editor). Click the images to play the animation clips. 

interval-integrated form also acts as a temporal low-pass filter: boundary perturbations affect only the marginal portion of the event support, making RoTE naturally robust to noisy start and end times. To validate TIE in practice, we construct OmniEvents , a structured event-prompt dataset consisting of three parts: 1). PexelsEvents with 250k clips of general case video, 2). RoboticsEvents with 86k clips of task-specific robotics, and 3). GameEvents with 80k clips of gameplay videos collected from EldenRing. We integrate TIE into Wan2.2-5B-TI2V and evaluate it on OmniEvents . Our experiments are organized around four questions: whether TIE remains compatible with existing DiT generators, whether it improves time interval controllability, whether it remains robust under noisy interval boundaries for large-scale real-world training, and whether the gain truly comes from interval-aware encoding. Empirically, TIE preserves standard visual quality, substantially improves human-verified temporal grounding (raising TCSR from 77.34% to 96.03% and reducing temporal boundary error from 0.261s to 0.073s), improves trajectory-level temporal alignment metrics, remains effective under noisy timestamp perturbations, and reaches comparable visual and temporal-control quality in fewer training steps. Qualitative case studies on EldenRing further show localized editing of future interactions without corrupting earlier events. (Video examples can be found in Figure 2) Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose Time Interval Encoding ( TIE ) for the concurrent-event regime that single-active-prompt methods cannot represent. Two principles—Temporal Integrability and Duration Invariance—uniquely determine a closed-form sinc-modulated encoder ( RoTE ) with zero overhead over RoPE .• We establish a structured-prompt evaluation setting for interval-conditioned video generation, including the OmniEvents dataset and human-verified temporal-grounding metrics such as TCSR and trajectory-level metrics. • We show that TIE is robust to noisy temporal boundaries, a core requirement for large-scale event-conditioned pretraining where interval annotations are often produced by imperfect automatic annotators. • We show empirically that TIE preserves base-model visual quality, substantially improves human-verified and trajectory-level temporal grounding, accelerates the convergence of temporal grounding, and supports controllable multi-subject interactions. 

## 2 Related Work 

Multi-event video generation conditions the synthesis on a sequence of event-specific prompts. Across paradigms, we observe that all existing methods share a single structural assumption — the single-active-prompt constraint: at most one event prompt is valid at any given timestamp. Sequential-token approaches such as Phenaki [ 31 ] translate disjoint prompts into a continuous token stream; diffusion-based extenders Gen-L-Video [ 33 ] and MEVG [ 22 ] denoise non-overlapping local windows; multi-agent systems DreamFactory [ 38 ] and VGoT [ 45 ] structure transitions between sequentially scheduled events. Recent temporal-encoding methods inherit the same constraint: MinT [ 37 ] aligns multi-event features through positional embeddings indexed at scalar timestamps, TS-Attn [ 44 ]applies separable mask-based attention over disjoint prompt-time slots, and LongLive [ 41 ] preserves single-prompt KV state via KV-recache. In all of the above, each event is bound to a temporal point or a disjoint slot, so concurrent and overlapping events are inexpressible by construction. Yet physi-cally realistic interactions—bimanual manipulation, multi-subject sports, adversarial combat—are inherently concurrent: in OmniEvents , two or more events overlap in 68% of general clips and over 99% of robotics and gameplay clips. Closing this gap requires elevating the time interval itself to a first-class primitive, rather than retrofitting concurrency onto sequential schedules. 33 Method 

Figure 3: Comparison between normal RoPE (Point-wise) and TIE (Interval-based): The point-wise RoPE cannot naturally model the point-to-interval event activation. While our TIE supports natural modeling of time interval. 

3.1 Time Interval Encoding 

To bridge point-wise video features and interval-based textual events, we propose Time Interval Encoding (TIE) . We treat a video token as a temporal point with midpoint timestamp mi ∈ R, and a textual event token as a time interval Ij = [ tsj , t ej ] (find visualization explanation in 3). The goal is to extend RoPE from point-to-point matching to point-to-interval matching while preserving the standard dot-product attention interface. 

RoPE Review. For a token z ∈ Rd at time t, standard RoPE applies RoPE( z, t ) = Rtz, where 

Rt = diag( A1,t , A2,t , . . . , Ad/ 2,t ), Ai,t =

cos( θit) − sin( θit)sin( θit) cos( θit)



. (1) Its key property is 

srope (q, k; tq , t k) = RoPE( q, t q )⊤RoPE( k, t k) = q⊤Rtk −tq k. (2) 

RoPE therefore models relations between temporal points ; TIE extends it to temporal intervals .

Core TIE Formulation. To define a principled point-to-interval score, the governing requirements should be both natural and necessary. Since an event is temporally extended, a reasonable score should aggregate evidence over the full interval rather than collapse it to a single timestamp; otherwise interior evidence is discarded and temporal aliasing is introduced. At the same time, the score should remain comparable across intervals of different lengths; otherwise the accumulated similarity grows trivially with duration and systematically biases attention toward long events. These considerations naturally lead to the following two principles. 

Definition 3.1 (Two Principles of TIE ). An interval-aware score satisfies the TIE principles if: • (Temporal Integrability. ) The raw interval score is defined by integrating point-wise RoPE 

evidence over the full temporal support of the event. Formally, for some probability kernel 

μI supported on I with μI (I) > 0,

¯s(q, k; tq , I ) := Eτ ∼μI [srope (q, k; tq , τ )] .

• (Duration Invariance. ) The final interval-aware score should reflect semantic relevance rather than grow trivially with duration. Accordingly, 

s(q, k; tq , I ) := 1

C(μI ) ¯s(q, k; tq , I ), C(μI ) > 0,

where C(μI ) depends only on μI and is independent of q, k, and tq .4These principles are not merely intuitive desiderata. Temporal Integrability is necessary because an event is a temporally extended object: collapsing I to its center or boundaries discards interior evidence and introduces temporal aliasing. Duration Invariance is equally necessary because, without normalization, the accumulated similarity grows trivially with interval length and systematically biases attention toward long events. In this sense, the principles are both reasonable and indispensable. The two principles can characterize TIE . First, by Temporal Integrability ,

¯s = Eτ ∼μI [srope (q, k; tq , τ )] = RoPE( q, t q )⊤Eτ ∼μI [RoPE( k; τ )] . (3) Therefore, TIE must be the form: 

TIE( k, I ) ∝ Eτ ∼μI [RoPE( k; τ )] .

By duration invariance, we require the renormalized coefficient should satisfy 

1 = Eq∼U (Sd−1)[RoPE( q, c )⊤TIE( q, I )] ,

where c denotes the midpoint of interval I. Solving the equation above shows that the coefficient does not depend on a specific q:

TIE( k, I ) = 1

C(μI ) Eτ ∼μI [RoPE( k, τ )] . (4) The corresponding score will be 

s(q, k, t q , I ) := RoPE( q, t q )⊤TIE( k, I ). (5) 

3.2 A Closed-Form Instantiation: Uniform Kernel Yields Sinc-Modulated RoPE 

The characterization theorem above is constructive: once the probability kernel is fixed, the corre-sponding TIE instantiation is fixed as well. In particular, choosing the uniform kernel does not merely suggest a convenient variant; it yields a closed-form encoder compatible with the two principles under uniform averaging. 

Theorem 3.2 (Uniform-kernel TIE yields the closed-form RoTE ). Given I = [ ts, t e], let μI =

U([ ts, t e]) , and define the interval center and radius by c = ( ts + te)/2 and r = ( te − ts)/2. Then the corresponding TIE encoder has the closed form 

Ai,c,r = sinc( θir)

cos( θic) − sin( θic)sin( θic) cos( θic)



. (6) 

Stacking the blocks gives Rc,r = diag( A1,c,r , A2,c,r , . . . , Ad/ 2,c,r ), and the resulting interval encoder is RoTE( k, c, r ) = 1 

> Cr

Rc,r k, where Cr = 2

> d

Pd/ 2 

> ℓ=1

sinc( θℓr). Consequently, for a query token qi at time mi and a key token kj associated with interval Ij = [ tsj , t ej ], the attention score becomes 

si,j ∝ RoPE( qi, m i)⊤RoTE( kj , c j , r j ), cj = tsj + tej

2 , r j = tej − tsj

2 . (7) The normalization constant is chosen to preserve unit expected self-overlap at the interval center, preventing attention scores from depending trivially on interval length. The center c controls the rotation phase, while the radius r suppresses high-frequency bands through sinc( θr ). Long intervals therefore act as a temporal low-pass filter, and RoTE reduces to standard RoPE as r → 0. This gives the promised one-to-one relationship: the two principles characterize the TIE family, and the uniform-kernel choice singles out the sinc-modulated closed-form solution. 

Boundary-only Ablation. For ablations we also consider the Dirac-kernel variant DoTE , which keeps only the interval boundaries: DoTE( k, I ) = Concat (RoPE( k(s), t s), RoPE( k(e), t e)) .

Unlike RoTE , this variant ignores the interval interior. Its formal derivation is also deferred to Section A.1. In practice, we scale every timestamp with a scaling factor γ, that is, c = γ ts+te 

> 2

, r =

γ te−ts 

> 2

, so that we can better control the decaying speed. By default we choose γ = 4 .0.53.3 RoTE for Large-Scale Pretraining 

A central requirement for large-scale event-conditioned video pretraining is tolerance to imperfect temporal boundaries. In small curated benchmarks, event intervals may be manually verified with high precision. At scale, however, event-time annotations are more likely to come from VLMs, action detectors, captioning models, or other automatic perception systems. These annotators can provide useful event semantics, but their predicted start and end times are inevitably noisy. Therefore, an interval-aware temporal encoding should not depend on frame-perfect endpoints. It should be able to treat noisy intervals as coarse temporal support for event grounding. The following theorem formalizes this property for RoTE . The key distinction is that RoPE and DoTE encode events through pointwise temporal phases: RoPE collapses an event to a single timestamp, while DoTE 

places all temporal information on the two boundaries. Consequently, perturbing the timestamp or either endpoint directly perturbs the encoded phase. In contrast, RoTE represents an event by a duration-normalized integral of RoPE features over the interval. Boundary perturbations therefore affect only the marginal portion of the integration domain, yielding a robustness behavior controlled by the relative boundary disturbance. 

Theorem 3.3 (Expected robustness of RoTE to timestamp noise) . Define the unscaled interval-attention score 

si,j (c, r ) := RoPE( qi, m i)⊤RoTE( kj , c, r ), RoTE( k, c, r ) = C−1 

> r

Rc,r k. (8) 

For event Ij = [ tsj , t ej ], let cj = ( tsj +tej )/2 and rj = ( tej −tsj )/2 > 0. Suppose its observed endpoints are etsj = tsj + ϵsj , etej = tej + ϵej , |ϵsj |, |ϵej | ≤ δ < r j a.s. (9) 

Write 

∆cj := ϵsj + ϵej

2 , ∆rj := ϵej − ϵsj

2 , ecj = cj + ∆ cj , erj = rj + ∆ rj . (10) 

Assume the normalization does not degenerate on the perturbed radius range, 

Cmin ,j := inf    

> ρ∈[rj−δ,r j+δ]

|Cρ| > 0. (11) 

Then 

|si,j (ecj , erj ) − si,j (cj , r j )| ≤ ∥qi∥ ∥ kj ∥ δrj − δ

3

Cmin ,j 

+ 2

C2min ,j 

!

. (12) 

Therefore, if δ ≤ rj /2 and Cmin ,j is bounded away from zero, RoTE has expected noise sensitivity 

O(∥qi∥ ∥ kj ∥ δ/r j ). By contrast, point-wise RoPE and boundary-only DoTE have local worst-case timestamp sensitivity O(∥qi∥ ∥ kj ∥ θmax δ), where θmax := max ℓ θℓ, with no decay in the interval radius rj .Remark 3.4 (Interpretation of the robustness bound) . The theorem shows that the timestamp-noise sensitivity of RoTE is controlled by the relative boundary error δ/r j when the normalization is non-degenerate. This relative scaling is the key difference from point-wise or boundary-only encodings. Since RoTE aggregates positional evidence over the full temporal support of the event, perturbing the start or end time only changes the marginal portion of the interval representation. As a result, the effect of boundary noise is averaged over the event duration, and long intervals become increasingly insensitive to small endpoint errors. In contrast, point-wise RoPE collapses the event to a single timestamp, while boundary-only DoTE places all temporal information on the two endpoints; in both cases, timestamp noise directly perturbs the encoded phase and does not decay with the interval radius. 

Remark 3.5 (Low-pass smoothing from the closed-form interval integral) . The robustness of RoTE 

can also be understood from the closed-form frequency response of the interval integral. For each RoPE frequency θℓ, the uniform-kernel interval encoder multiplies the corresponding rotation block by 

sinc( θℓr). Therefore, perturbations of the interval center are attenuated at high temporal frequencies: 

θℓ |sinc( θℓr)| = sin( θℓr)

r ≤ 1

r . (13) Thus, up to the non-degenerate normalization factor, the local sensitivity of RoTE to center pertur-bations decays with the interval radius. For small intervals, this behavior reduces to the point-wise 6RoPE regime; for long intervals, the interval integral acts as a temporal low-pass filter and suppresses high-frequency phase noise. This smoothing effect is absent in point-wise RoPE and boundary-only 

DoTE , whose temporal information is concentrated on one timestamp or two endpoints and therefore does not become less sensitive as the interval becomes longer. 

Remark 3.6 (Why learned interval embeddings do not provide the same guarantee) . A learned interval embedding could in principle become robust to noisy boundaries if it is trained with sufficiently diverse boundary perturbations. However, this robustness would be distribution-dependent: it holds only for the noise patterns seen during training and provides no structural guarantee that longer intervals should be less sensitive to endpoint errors. In contrast, the robustness of RoTE is architectural. The sinc attenuation is built into the closed-form interval representation itself, so the smoothing effect does not rely on learning a particular noise distribution or adding explicit boundary-noise augmentation. This property is especially important for large-scale pretraining, where event intervals may be generated by different VLMs or detectors whose boundary errors vary across domains. 

Remark 3.7 (Implication for large-scale event-conditioned pretraining) . This robustness is important for scaling interval-aware video generation beyond small curated datasets. In real-world data col-lection, event intervals are often obtained from VLMs, action detectors, captioning models, or other neural annotators. Such pipelines can identify the correct event semantics at scale, but their start and end timestamps are inevitably approximate. Therefore, robustness to boundary noise is not merely a desirable property of RoTE ; it is a core requirement for using interval-conditioned objectives in large-scale pretraining. The δ/r j sensitivity indicates that RoTE can use noisy intervals as coarse temporal support, rather than depending on frame-perfect endpoint supervision. 

## 4 Experiments 

We evaluate TIE as a plug-and-play interval-aware encoding for DiT-based video generation. Om-niEvents is deliberately constructed in the concurrent-event regime (68%–99% per-clip overlap probability), where sequential multi-event methods such as MinT [ 37 ], TS-Attn [ 44 ], MEVG [ 22 ]are structurally inapplicable—their single-active-prompt assumption disallows overlapping prompts. Our experiments therefore center on three claims: (i) TIE preserves the visual prior of the base DiT, (ii) TIE substantially improves interval-level controllability under concurrent prompts via human-verified and trajectory-level metrics, (iii) TIE remains robust under noisy interval boundaries, a key requirement for large-scale real-world training where event-time annotations are typically obtained from imperfect VLM- or detector-based pipelines, and, and (iv) ablations verify that gains arise from interval integration rather than boundary-only or timestamp encoding. We retain comparisons against MinT and TS-Attn on their native sequential benchmarks (StoryEval, StoryBench) in Section 4.3 and Section D. We use RoTE —the uniform-kernel closed-form instance of TIE —as the default. 

4.1 Experimental Setup Backbone. We use Wan2.2-5B-TI2V as the base video generator, following its standard DiT archi-tecture and training recipe [ 32 ]. TIE is inserted only into the text-to-video cross-attention pathway by replacing point-wise temporal RoPE on event tokens with interval-aware key encodings. 

Datasets. We construct the OmniEvents dataset, which consists of three complementary domains. For general event-conditioned video generation, we collect 250k clips from Pexels-400k [ 46 ], denoted as PexelsEvents . For high-precision action-centric evaluation, we collect 80k clips of EldenRing gameplay videos with frame-accurate event intervals recorded from game memory, denoted as 

GameEvents . For task-specific domain applications, we annotate 86k clips from the Agibot-World-Alpha [ 7], forming the RoboticsEvents part. Each training sample is represented as a set of event tokens, where each event is associated with a textual description and a time interval (Figure A4 shows an example case). Details about the OmniEvents can be found in Appendix B.2. 

Baselines. We compare against several variants: Base , the original Wan2.2 model without event-interval fine-tuning; Finetuned , a standard event-conditioned fine-tuning baseline that concatenates event descriptions and timestamps into the prompt but keeps point-wise temporal encoding; DoTE , a boundary-only variant that encodes only the start and end timestamps; and RoTE , our main method. Dense mask-aware attention is not used as a primary baseline because frame–event pairwise masks or biases break FlashAttention compatibility, whereas TIE preserves the base DiT’s FlashAttention path by keeping the standard QK attention form. We do not introduce an additional learned time-embedding 7baseline because it would primarily test another parameterization of timestamp conditioning; instead, our ablation directly isolates the mechanism of interest: implicit timestamp learning and full interval integration. 

Evaluation metrics. We evaluate three aspects. First, for visual quality and semantic alignment, we report FID, FVD, and VideoScore dimensions including visual quality, temporal consistency, dynamic degree, text alignment, and factual consistency [ 11 , 29 , 10 ]. These metrics test whether TIE 

preserves the base model’s visual generation ability. Second, for time interval controllability, we use both human-verified event-level metrics and temporal alignment metrics. Our primary human metric is Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Rate (TCSR), which summarizes the total temporal alignment degree, together with breakdowns into Event Occurrence, Temporal Error, Order Accuracy and Overlap Accuracy. We report CLIP-Event, EMD and nDTW as trajectory-level temporal alignment proxies. CLIP-Event calculates the per-event CLIP Score for generated videos at frame-level, while EMD and nDTW compare the generated videos with reference ones in temporal alignment. These metrics complement TCSR by measuring whether the generated visual or semantic trajectory follows the target temporal structure. 

4.2 TIE Preserves Visual Quality and DiT Compatibility 

A practical temporal-control module should improve controllability without damaging the visual prior of a pretrained DiT generator. We first evaluate whether TIE preserves video generation quality. Table 1 reports FID, FVD, and VideoScore results on PexelsEvents . Compared with the Finetuned baseline, TIE achieves comparable or better FID/FVD while maintaining similar visual quality, temporal consistency, text alignment, and factual consistency. This indicates that interval-aware event encoding does not disrupt the base model’s visual generation distribution. Instead, TIE improves temporal grounding while remaining compatible with the original DiT backbone. These results support our first claim: TIE is a plug-and-play interval encoding module that preserves the visual and semantic behavior of the underlying DiT generator.                                                   

> Text-to-Video (T2V) Image-to-Video (I2V) Method FID ↓FVD ↓VQ ↑TC ↑DD ↑TA ↑FC ↑VQ ↑TC ↑DD ↑TA ↑FC ↑
> Base 59.68 357.51 2.73 2.78 2.58 2.68 2.65 2.98 2.94 2.93 2.87 2.88 Finetuned 43.74 234.40 3.03 3.01 2.97 2.86 2.94 3.26 3.21 3.28 3.06 3.12
> TIE (RoTE )42.53 217.29 3.10 3.05 3.06 2.92 2.99 3.30 3.22 3.27 3.07 3.18

Table 1: Quality on PexelsEvents (68% per-event overlap; sequential-event methods inapplicable, see Section 4.3 / Table A2). I2V uses the first frame as visual condition. VQ/TC/DD/TA/FC = Visual/Temporal/Dynamic/Text/Factual {Quality, Consistency, Degree, Alignment, Consistency}. 

4.3 TIE Improves Time Interval Controllability 

We next evaluate the central claim of this work: whether TIE improves the model’s ability to generate events at specified time intervals, including sequential, overlapping, and concurrent event structures. 

Human-Verified Temporal Constraint Satisfaction. Standard metrics such as FVD, CLIP, and VideoScore are insufficient for precise temporal grounding: they may judge two videos similarly even when an action starts several seconds too early or too late. We therefore introduce a structured human verification protocol that directly checks whether the generated video satisfies the temporal constraints specified in the event prompt. For each generated video, annotators are shown the video and the structured event prompt. For each requested event, they verify whether the event occurs and, if it occurs, record the start- and end-time deviations from the requested interval [ts, t e]. Higher-level metrics such as order accuracy, overlap accuracy, and TCSR are then computed from these event-level occurrence and boundary annotations. Annotators do not see the model identity and do not provide open-ended preference judgments. We sample 100 prompts and generate 100 videos with the finetuned baseline and 100 videos with TIE . For each event, 10 human annotators verify event occurrence and record the start- and end-time deviations from the requested interval. All metrics are computed from the aggregated human annotations. We report five event-level metrics: 

Event Occurrence measures event realization; Temporal Error measures boundary deviation with missing-event penalties; Order Accuracy measures before/after consistency; Overlap Accuracy 

measures concurrency preservation; and TCSR measures overall Temporal Constraint Satisfaction 

Rates. TCSR is computed as the fraction of satisfied event-level and relation-level constraints. An 8interval constraint is satisfied only if the event occurs and both start/end deviations are within a 0.25s tolerance; order and overlap constraints require the corresponding events to occur and preserve the requested temporal relation. See Section C for the full annotation protocol and metric definitions. As shown in Figure 4(a), TIE substantially improves all temporal constraint metrics. Figure 5 provides a representative qualitative example: TIE aligns event onset and multi-event responses more faithfully than prompt concatenation alone. This confirms that TIE does not merely improve event recognition, but grounds events to the correct temporal support. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80           

> Relative improvement over Finetuned (%)
> Event
> Occurrence
> Temporal
> Error
> Order
> Acc.
> Overlap
> Acc.
> Overall
> TCSR
> 80.45→96.03 +19.4%
> 0.261s→0.073s +72.0%
> 63.37→92.32 +45.7%
> 66.23→88.64 +33.8%
> 77.34→96.03 +24.2%
> (a) Human-Verified Temporal Gains
> inside bar: Finetuned→RoTE raw score
> bar-end label: relative gain
> inside bar: Finetuned→RoTE raw score
> bar-end label: relative gain
> nDTW ↑ CLIP-Event ↑ EMD ↓
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Normalized within metric
> 0.347
> 0.359
> 0.370
> 0.226
> 0.235
> 0.246 0.132
> 0.125
> 0.120
> (b) Trajectory-Level Temporal Alignment
> Base Finetuned RoTE

Figure 4: Temporal alignment improvements of TIE. (a) Human-verified metrics show that RoTE consistently improves over finetuning across event occurrence, temporal error, ordering accuracy, overlap accuracy, and overall TCSR. Each bar shows the relative improvement over the finetuned baseline, while the in-bar label reports the raw score change from finetuning to TIE . (b) Trajectory-level metrics further confirm the improvement: TIE achieves higher nDTW and CLIP-Event scores and lower EMD, indicating better temporal alignment at the trajectory level. 

Figure 5: Text-to-video generation example. The Finetuned baseline misses some requested events (e.g., “the man puts his hand off”) and misaligns event onset (e.g., the train remains static in the frame instead of entering at 7.0s), whereas the TIE -enhanced variant responds at the correct time. 

Method Human Animal Object Retrieval Creative Easy Hard Average Base (10s) 27.6% 27.2% 20.3% 43.1% 13.9% 34.5% 5.9% 23.9% Finetuned (10s) 39.0% 41.0% 35.7% 53.1% 25.3% 55.5% 21.5% 38.8% 

RoTE (10s) 58.5% 52.3% 48.4% 53.8% 42.7% 64.4% 38.8% 52.3% Base (5s) 41.1% 41.7% 35.9% 51.2% 28.0% 58.6% 20.2% 39.7% TS-Attn[44] (5s) 42.2% 45.4% 36.6% 52.8% 33.0% 56.9% 25.5% 41.8% Finetuned (5s) 41.9% 39.8% 37.1% 50.8% 26.7% 55.8% 23.0% 39.3% 

RoTE (5s) 54.7% 52.8% 42.4% 53.1% 36.3% 61.2% 36.9% 49.4% 

Table 2: StoryEval evaluation results under 10s and 5s generation settings. We include both settings because our main setup generates 10s videos (161 frames, 16 fps), whereas Wan2.2-5B primarily supports 5s generation (121 frames, 24 fps). All methods are evaluated at 720P. TS-Attn is reproduced at 720P instead of its original 480P setting because Wan2.2-5B does not support 480P synthesis. 

Trajectory-Level Temporal Alignment. Human-verified TCSR directly evaluates event-level con-straint satisfaction. We complement it with trajectory-level temporal alignment metrics with nDTW [26 ], EMD and CLIP-Event. Given a generated video and a reference event timeline, nDTW computes the distance of the optimal temporal warping path between the generated sequence and the target sequence, EMD calculates the Wasserstein distance between generated videos and ground truths on the temporal axis, while CLIP-Event calculates the per-event frame-level video CLIP Score. Higher nDTW and CLIP-Event indicate higher temporal alignment. Lower EMD represents closer results in temporal event distribution. As shown in Figure 4 (b), TIE consistently improves nDTW, EMD and CLIP-Event. Combined with the TCSR results above, this shows that TIE improves temporal controllability from both event-level and trajectory-level perspectives. 9Comparison on Baselines’ Native Regime. OmniEvents experiments above target the concur-rent regime where MinT and TS-Attn are structurally inapplicable. We therefore evaluate TIE 

on StoryEval [ 35 ] and StoryBench [ 4]—sequential-event benchmarks built for prior work, where baselines operate in their designed regime. As shown in Table 2, we can see that, under OOD prompt (the prompt of StoryEval is out-of-distribution from our training data) and OOD length (we mainly train the model at 10s video clips) condition, Finetuned fails to improve over baseline, while 

TIE successfully models the temporal organization. Comparison results on StoryBench [ 4] can be found in Section D. These results further show that TIE ’s temporal-modeling advantage holds under broader evaluation protocols. Additional evaluations on StoryBench and prompt-extension settings in Section D show consistent gains under broader story-generation and prompt-conditioning protocols. 

Faster Convergence of Temporal Grounding. Beyond final accuracy, we evaluate whether TIE 

accelerates the learning of temporal grounding. We train Finetuned and TIE variants under identical data ( RoboticsEvents ), batch size, learning rate, and training schedule, and measure temporal metrics at matched training steps. As shown in Figure 6, TIE reaches the same temporal-control level (nDTW, EMD) and visual quality (FVD, CLIP-Video) (it is noted that CLIP-Video is different from CLIP-Event) in substantially fewer steps. This suggests that interval-aware encoding improves the efficiency of learning temporal grounding, rather than merely adding capacity or overfitting to the final evaluation metrics. 6k 10k 14k 18k            

> Training steps
> 100 120 140
> FVD
> −12.6%
> FVD ↓
> 6k 10k 14k 18k
> Training steps
> 0.870 0.880 0.890 0.900
> CLIP-Event
> +1.2%
> CLIP-Video ↑
> 6k 10k 14k 18k
> Training steps
> 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38
> nDTW
> +4.9%
> nDTW ↑
> 6k 10k 14k 18k
> Training steps
> 0.100 0.110 0.120 0.130
> EMD
> −9.8%
> EMD ↓
> Finetuned RoTE

Figure 6: Performance trends during training with and without TIE . TIE leads to faster improvement across both visual and temporal metrics. 

Method FID ↓ FVD ↓ CLIP-Event ↑ VQ ↑ TC ↑ DD ↑ TA ↑ FC ↑

Base 59.68 357.51 0.226 2.73 2.78 2.58 2.68 2.65 NoRoPE 43.74 234.40 0.235 3.03 3.01 2.97 2.86 2.94 

DoTE 43.84 234.79 0.241 3.05 3.01 3.01 2.88 2.94 

RoTE 42.53 217.29 0.246 3.10 3.05 3.06 2.92 2.99 

γ = 2 .0 43.00 231.20 0.246 3.08 3.04 3.04 2.90 2.98 

γ = 8 .0 43.15 249.24 0.245 3.09 3.05 3.06 2.92 2.99 

Table 3: Ablation study on PexelsEvents . The comparison between NoRoPE , DoTE , and TIE isolates the effect of interval-aware integration over prompt concatenation and boundary-only encoding. 

Case Study: Complex Multi-Subject Interaction. We evaluate TIE on gameplay data from 

GameEvents to test fine-grained action-centric event grounding in a high-dynamic multi-subject domain. Each sample contains structured event intervals for the player and boss. Unlike general web videos, this domain provides highly accurate event boundaries from game instrumentation, allowing us to test whether the model respects precise action timing. Figure 7 shows controlled prompt modifications applied to later event intervals while keeping earlier intervals fixed. The generated videos share the same early trajectory, then diverge according to the modified future event descriptions. In one sequence, the Tarnished rushes forward and attempts an attack but is interrupted by the boss. In another, the boss changes attack type, producing a different visual effect. In a third, the Tarnished rolls backward and avoids the hit. This demonstrates that TIE supports localized temporal editing: changing a future interval affects the intended future behavior without corrupting earlier events. We also performed experiments on RoboticsEvents . Visual results can be found in Section D.3. 

4.4 Ablation Study 

Finally, we conduct minimal ablations to verify the components implied by the TIE formulation. Since TIE is a simple interval-encoding module rather than a multi-component system, we focus 10 Figure 7: Generation Results on Game Data: In each row we show the frames and their actions. To illustrate the controllability enabled by TIE , we modify the target events and obtain different endings. on the variants that directly correspond to the theory. NoRoPE removes temporal encoding and relies on prompt concatenation. DoTE encodes only interval boundaries using a Dirac-kernel variant, preserving start/end timestamps while discarding interior evidence. RoTE uses uniform-kernel integration over the full interval with normalization. We also test sensitivity to the scaling factor γ.The comparison between NoRoPE and DoTE shows that explicitly encoding temporal boundaries already improves temporal alignment. However, DoTE remains weaker than TIE because it ignores the interval interior. The full RoTE version achieves the best FVD and CLIP-Event, supporting the theoretical claim that interval integration is more appropriate than boundary-only encoding. The γ

variants remain close to the full model, suggesting that the method is mostly hyperparameter-agnostic. 

4.5 Robustness to noisy temporal annotations. 0 5s 10s                        

> Video time
> RoTE
> Perturbed
> (a)
> εs∼(0, σ2)εe∼(0, σ2)
> [s,e] → [ s+εs,e+εe]
> larger σ= stronger disturbance
> 00.5 1.0
> Temporal disturbance strength
> 85
> 90
> 95
> 100
> FVD
> 100.1
> Finetuned w/ clean timestamps 94.08
> largest disturbance: FVD 6.4% higher
> (b) FVD ↓
> 00.5 1.0
> Temporal disturbance strength
> 0.26
> 0.28
> 0.30
> nDTW
> 0.274
> Finetuned w/ clean timestamps 0.255
> largest disturbance: still +7.5% better
> nDTW ↑
> 00.5 1.0
> Temporal disturbance strength
> 0.120
> 0.125
> 0.130
> 0.135
> 0.140
> 0.145
> EMD  0.138
> Finetuned w/ clean timestamps 0.142
> largest disturbance: still +2.8% better
> EMD ↓
> Finetuned with clean timestamps RoTE w/ disturbance

Figure 8: Robustness to temporal annotation disturbance. (a) We perturb the start and end timestamps of each RoTE interval with Gaussian noise: [s, e ] → [s + ϵs, e + ϵe], where ϵs, ϵ e ∼N (0 , σ 2). (b) RoTE remains robust as the disturbance strength increases: even under the largest disturbance, it still achieves better temporal alignment than finetuning with clean timestamps, while only moderately increasing FVD. In real-world data collection, perfectly precise temporal boundaries are rarely available at scale. Un-like controlled game traces or carefully curated robotic demonstrations, large-scale event annotations for open-domain videos will often need to be obtained from VLMs, action detectors, captioning mod-els, or other automatic perception systems. Such annotations inevitably contain boundary noise: the event may be correctly identified, but its start and end timestamps may be shifted by several frames or even longer. Therefore, robustness to imperfect interval endpoints is not merely a desirable property, but a prerequisite for using interval-aware temporal encoding in large-scale video pretraining. To test this property, we perturb the start and end timestamps of each RoTE interval with Gaussian noise and evaluate how temporal alignment changes as the noise strength increases. The results are shown in Figure 8. RoTE remains stable under increasingly noisy boundaries: even at the largest perturbation level, it still outperforms the finetuning baseline trained with clean timestamps on nDTW and EMD. This indicates that the benefit of RoTE does not rely on exact boundary supervision. Instead, RoTE uses the interval as a coarse temporal support for event grounding, and its duration-normalized interval aggregation provides a robust inductive bias even when the annotated endpoints are imprecise. 11 This robustness is important for scalability. A temporal representation that requires frame-perfect event boundaries would be difficult to deploy beyond small curated datasets, because large-scale real-world event annotations are necessarily approximate. By remaining effective under noisy start and end times, RoTE makes interval-conditioned training compatible with realistic annotation pipelines, where event intervals may come from automatic VLM-based labeling or other neural detectors rather than manual frame-level supervision. 

4.6 Summary of Experimental Findings 

The experiments provide consistent evidence for the effectiveness of TIE . First, TIE is compatible with strong pretrained DiT models: it preserves visual quality and semantic alignment while improving temporal grounding. Second, TIE improves precise interval controllability, with gains verified by human metrics, trajectory-level metrics, and out-of-distribution story-generation benchmarks. Third, 

TIE remains robust when dealing with noisy timestamp, indicating robustness to imperfect interval boundaries. Fourth, qualitative results on game and robotics scenarios show that TIE supports multi-subject interactions and future-event editing. Finally, ablations confirm that the gains come from interval-aware integration and duration-normalized encoding, rather than generic timestamp conditioning or boundary-only heuristics. Together, these results show that TIE is a principled, practical, and robust interval-aware temporal encoding method for event-centric video generation. 

## 5 Conclusion 

This paper proposes Time Interval Encoding ( TIE ), an interval-aware formulation for the concurrent-event regime that single-active-prompt methods cannot represent. By modeling events as time intervals rather than as the point-wise, disjoint slots assumed by prior multi-event generators, TIE 

enables precise control over event duration, ordering, and simultaneous overlap. To demonstrate its practical effectiveness, we evaluate TIE within a DiT-based video generation setting. Experiments on both general-domain and domain-specific video data show that TIE improves temporal alignment and the modeling of highly dynamic motions, particularly in complex multi-event and multi-subject scenarios. Overall, TIE provides a principled temporal foundation for controllable video generation and suggests a promising direction for long-horizon generation and interactive world simulation. We believe TIE may serve as a useful building block for future generative models that require structured reasoning over time. 

## Acknowledgements 

We thank Pexels for providing a large collection of publicly accessible videos that supports the construction of PexelsEvents. We also acknowledge Elden Ring and the AgiBot dataset, which provide valuable sources for studying high-dynamic gameplay interactions and robotics event structures. We thank the Cheat Engine community and tooling ecosystem for enabling game-state inspection during data collection. We are grateful to the external annotation team for their careful human verification efforts, and to Xiangrui Ke for helpful suggestions and discussions on data annotation. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of machine learning, specifically focusing on spatiotemporal modeling in video generation . The proposed method contributes to the broader scientific community by improving multi-subject control and temporal consistency in multi-event video generation , with potential applications in controllable video creation and simulation .

## References 

[1] NVIDIA: Niket Agarwal, Arslan Ali, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Balaji, Erik Barker, Tiffany Cai, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Yongxin Chen, Yin Cui, Yifan Ding, Daniel Dworakowski, Jiaojiao Fan, Michele Fenzi, Francesco Ferroni, Sanja Fidler, Dieter Fox, Songwei Ge, Yunhao Ge, Jinwei Gu, Siddharth Gururani, Ethan He, Jiahui Huang, Jacob Huffman, Pooya Jannaty, 12 Jingyi Jin, Seung Wook Kim, Gergely Klár, Grace Lam, Shiyi Lan, Laura Leal-Taixe, Anqi Li, Zhaoshuo Li, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Huan Ling, Ming-Yu Liu, Xian Liu, Alice Luo, Qianli Ma, Hanzi Mao, Kaichun Mo, Arsalan Mousavian, Seungjun Nah, Sriharsha Niverty, David Page, Despoina Paschalidou, Zeeshan Patel, Lindsey Pavao, Morteza Ramezanali, Fitsum Reda, Xiaowei Ren, Vasanth Rao Naik Sabavat, Ed Schmerling, Stella Shi, Bartosz Stefaniak, Shitao Tang, Lyne Tchapmi, Przemek Tredak, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Jibin Varghese, Hao Wang, Haoxiang Wang, Heng Wang, Ting-Chun Wang, Fangyin Wei, Xinyue Wei, Jay Zhangjie Wu, Jiashu Xu, Wei Yang, Lin Yen-Chen, Xiaohui Zeng, Yu Zeng, Jing Zhang, Qinsheng Zhang, Yuxuan Zhang, Qingqing Zhao, and Artur Zolkowski. Cosmos world foundation model platform for Physical AI, 2025. [2] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: high-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023. [3] Jake Bruce, Michael D. Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, Yusuf Aytar, Sarah Maria Elis-abeth Bechtle, Feryal Behbahani, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Nicolas Heess, Lucy Gonzalez, Simon Osindero, Sherjil Ozair, Scott Reed, Jingwei Zhang, Konrad Zolna, Jeff Clune, Nando De Fre-itas, Satinder Singh, and Tim Rocktäschel. Genie: generative interactive environments. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [4] Emanuele Bugliarello, Hernan Moraldo, Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Han Zhang, Dumitru Erhan, Vittorio Ferrari, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and Paul Voigtlaender. StoryBench: A Multifaceted Benchmark for Continuous Story Visualization. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [5] Minghong Cai, Xiaodong Cun, Xiaoyu Li, Wenze Liu, Zhaoyang Zhang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Xiangyu Yue. DiTCtrl: exploring attention control in multi-modal diffusion trans-former for tuning-free multi-prompt longer video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. [6] Weifeng Chen, Jie Wu, Pan Xie, Hefeng Wu, Jiashi Li, Xin Xia, Xuefeng Xiao, and Liang Lin. Control-A-Video: controllable text-to-video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13840 , 2023. [7] AgiBot World Colosseum contributors. AgiBot world colosseum. https://github.com/ OpenDriveLab/AgiBot-World , 2024. [8] Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [9] Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. AnimateDiff: animate your personalized text-to-image diffu-sion models without specific tuning. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. [10] Xuan He, Dongfu Jiang, Ge Zhang, Max Ku, Achint Soni, Sherman Siu, Haonan Chen, Abhranil Chandra, Ziyan Jiang, Aaran Arulraj, Kai Wang, Quy Duc Do, Yuansheng Ni, Bohan Lyu, Yaswanth Narsupalli, Rongqi Fan, Zhiheng Lyu, Yuchen Lin, and Wenhu Chen. VideoScore: building automatic metrics to simulate fine-grained human feedback for video generation. In 

Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2024. [11] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, Günter Klambauer, and Sepp Hochreiter. GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local Nash equilibrium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. [12] Anthony Hu, Lloyd Russell, Hudson Yeo, Zak Murez, George Fedoseev, Alex Kendall, Jamie Shotton, and Gianluca Corrado. GAIA-1: a generative world model for autonomous driving. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17080 , 2023. 13 [13] Siyuan Huang, Liliang Chen, Pengfei Zhou, Shengcong Chen, Zhengkai Jiang, Yue Hu, Yue Liao, Peng Gao, Hongsheng Li, Maoqing Yao, et al. EnerVerse: envisioning embodied future space for robotics manipulation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [14] Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan Zhang, Tianxing Wu, Qingyang Jin, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. VBench: comprehensive benchmark suite for video generative models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024. [15] Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Chaojie Mao, Jingfeng Zhang, Yulin Pan, and Yu Liu. VACE: all-in-one video creation and editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2025. [16] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2015. [17] Yixuan Li, Lei Chen, Runyu He, Zhenzhi Wang, Gangshan Wu, and Limin Wang. MultiSports: a multi-person video dataset of spatio-temporally localized sports actions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2021. [18] Han Lin, Abhay Zala, Jaemin Cho, and Mohit Bansal. VideoDirectorGPT: consistent multi-scene video generation via LLM-guided planning. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. [19] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [20] Haoyu Lu, Guoxing Yang, Nanyi Fei, Yuqi Huo, Zhiwu Lu, Ping Luo, and Mingyu Ding. VDT: general-purpose video diffusion transformers via mask modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [21] Xin Ma, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Gengyun Jia, Ziwei Liu, Yuan-Fang Li, Cunjian Chen, and Yu Qiao. Latte: latent diffusion transformer for video generation. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. [22] Gyeongrok Oh, Jaehwan Jeong, Sieun Kim, Wonmin Byeon, Jinkyu Kim, Sungwoong Kim, and Sangpil Kim. MEVG: multi-event video generation with text-to-video models. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2024. [23] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023. [24] Haonan Qiu, Menghan Xia, Yong Zhang, Yingqing He, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Ziwei Liu. FreeNoise: tuning-free longer video diffusion via noise rescheduling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [25] Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. [26] Hiroaki Sakoe and Seibi Chiba. Dynamic programming algorithm optimization for spoken word recognition. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing , 1978. [27] Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-A-Video: text-to-video generation without text-video data. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [28] Jianlin Su et al. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocom-puting , 2024. [29] Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphaël Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: a new metric and challenges. 

ArXiv , 2018. 14 [30] Dani Valevski, Yaniv Leviathan, Moab Arar, and Shlomi Fruchter. Diffusion models are real-time game engines. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [31] Ruben Villegas, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Hernan Moraldo, Han Zhang, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Santiago Castro, Julius Kunze, and Dumitru Erhan. Phenaki: variable length video generation from open-domain textual descriptions. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [32] Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianxiao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, Jiayu Wang, Jingfeng Zhang, Jingren Zhou, Jinkai Wang, Jixuan Chen, Kai Zhu, Kang Zhao, Keyu Yan, Lianghua Huang, Mengyang Feng, Ningyi Zhang, Pandeng Li, Pingyu Wu, Ruihang Chu, Ruili Feng, Shiwei Zhang, Siyang Sun, Tao Fang, Tianxing Wang, Tianyi Gui, Tingyu Weng, Tong Shen, Wei Lin, Wei Wang, Wei Wang, Wenmeng Zhou, Wente Wang, Wenting Shen, Wenyuan Yu, Xianzhong Shi, Xiaoming Huang, Xin Xu, Yan Kou, Yangyu Lv, Yifei Li, Yijing Liu, Yiming Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yitong Huang, Yong Li, You Wu, Yu Liu, Yulin Pan, Yun Zheng, Yuntao Hong, Yupeng Shi, Yutong Feng, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Zhi-Fan Wu, and Ziyu Liu. Wan: open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 , 2025. [33] Fu-Yun Wang, Wenshuo Chen, Guanglu Song, Han-Jia Ye, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Gen-L-Video: multi-text to long video generation via temporal co-denoising. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18264 , 2023. [34] Xiang Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Shiwei Zhang, Dayou Chen, Jiuniu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. VideoComposer: compositional video synthesis with motion controllability. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [35] Yiping Wang, Xuehai He, Kuan Wang, Luyao Ma, Jianwei Yang, Shuohang Wang, Si-mon Shaolei Du, and Yelong Shen. Is your world simulator a good story presenter? a consecutive events-based benchmark for future long video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16211 ,2024. [36] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed H. Chi, F. Xia, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. [37] Ziyi Wu, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Willi Menapace, Ivan Skorokhodov, Yuwei Fang, Varnith Chordia, Igor Gilitschenski, and Sergey Tulyakov. Mind the time: temporally-controlled multi-event video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. [38] Zhifei Xie, Daniel Tang, Dingwei Tan, Jacques Klein, Tegawend F Bissyand, and Saad Ezzini. DreamFactory: pioneering multi-scene long video generation with a multi-agent framework. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11788 , 2024. [39] Sherry Yang, Yilun Du, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Jonathan Tompson, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Dale Schuurmans, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning interactive real-world simulators. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [40] Shiyuan Yang, Liang Hou, Haibin Huang, Chongyang Ma, Pengfei Wan, Di Zhang, Xiaodong Chen, and Jing Liao. Direct-a-Video: customized video generation with user-directed camera movement and object motion. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , 2024. [41] Shuai Yang, Wei Huang, Ruihang Chu, Yicheng Xiao, Yuyang Zhao, Xianbang Wang, Muyang Li, Enze Xie, Yingcong Chen, Yao Lu, et al. LongLive: real-time interactive long video generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [42] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, Da Yin, Yuxuan Zhang, Weihan Wang, Yean Cheng, Bin Xu, Xiaotao Gu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. CogVideoX: text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. 15 [43] Shengming Yin, Chenfei Wu, Huan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Xiaodong Wang, Minheng Ni, Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, Jianlong Fu, Ming Gong, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu, Houqiang Li, and Nan Duan. NUWA-XL: diffusion over diffusion for eXtremely long video generation. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2023. [44] Hongyu Zhang, Yufan Deng, Zilin Pan, Peng-Tao Jiang, Bo Li, Qibin Hou, Zhiyang Dou, Zhen Dong, and Daquan Zhou. TS-Attn: temporal-wise separable attention for multi-event video generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [45] Mingzhe Zheng, Yongqi Xu, Haojian Huang, Xuran Ma, Yexin Liu, Wenjie Shu, Yatian Pang, Feilong Tang, Qifeng Chen, Harry Yang, et al. VideoGen-of-Thought: step-by-step generating multi-shot video with minimal manual intervention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02259 , 2024. [46] Zhou Zhi-Min. Pexels-400k: a large-scale dataset for video and image generation. https: //huggingface.co/datasets/jovianzm/Pexels-400k , 2023. [47] Siyuan Zhou, Yilun Du, Jiaben Chen, Yandong Li, Dit-Yan Yeung, and Chuang Gan. Robo-Dreamer: learning compositional world models for robot imagination. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [48] Fangqi Zhu, Hongtao Wu, Song Guo, Yuxiao Liu, Chilam Cheang, and Tao Kong. IRASim: a fine-grained world model for robot manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2025. 

## A Details and Proofs for TIE 

A.1 Proofs for Section 3 

This subsection provides the full formalization and proofs for the principle-based characterization stated in Section 3.1, and proves Theorems A.2 and A.3. 

Definition A.1 (Formal principles for interval-aware scores) . Let srope (q, k; tq , τ ) denote the standard point-to-point RoPE score in Equation (2). We say that an interval-aware score s(q, k; tq , I ) over an interval I = [ ts, t e] satisfies the following two principles: 

Temporal Integrability, i.e., There exists a probability μI supported on I with μI (I) > 0 such that the raw interval score is obtained by integrating point-wise RoPE scores over the temporal support of the interval, 

¯s(q, k; tq , I ) := Eτ ∼μI [srope (q, k; tq , τ )] . (A1) 

Duration Invariance, i.e., The final interval-aware score is obtained from the raw integral by a positive scalar normalization, 

s(q, k; tq , I ) := 1

C(μI ) ¯s(q, k; tq , I ), C(μI ) > 0, (A2) where C(μI ) depends only on the interval measure μI and is independent of q, k, and tq .When both conditions hold, we call s a principle-consistent point-to-interval score. 

Theorem A.2 (Uniform-kernel TIE yields RoTE ). For the uniform kernel μI = U([ ts, t e]) with interval center c = ( ts + te)/2 and radius r = ( te − ts)/2, the TIE encoder takes the closed form 

Rc,r = diag( A1,c,r , A2,c,r , . . . , Ad/ 2,c,r ), (A3) 

and therefore reduces to the normalized interval encoder 

RoTE( k, c, r ) = 1

Cr

Rc,r k. (A4) 

Consequently, for a query token qi at time mi and a key token kj associated with interval Ij = [ tsj , t ej ],the TIE attention score becomes 

si,j ∝ RoPE( qi, m i)⊤RoTE( kj , c j , r j ), cj = tsj + tej

2 , r j = tej − tsj

2 . (A5) 16 Proof of Theorem A.2. Set μI = U([ ts, t e]) and write the interval as I = [ c − r, c + r]. By Equa-tion (4), 

TIE( k, I ) = 1

Cr

12r

Z c+rc−r

RoPE (k, τ )dτ. (A6) For each frequency θ,

12r

Z c+rc−r

eiθτ dτ = eiθc sinc( θr ), (A7) so every 2 × 2 RoPE block averages to Ai,c,r = sinc( θir)Ai,c . Stacking the blocks yields the final results. To enforce Duration Invariance, we normalize by requiring unit expected self-overlap at the interval center: 

1 = Eq∼U (Sd−1)

RoPE( q, c )⊤RoTE( q, c, r ) . (A8) Using the isotropy identity Eq∼U (Sd−1)[q⊤M q] = 1 

> d

tr( M ), we obtain 

1 = 1

Cr

2

d

> d/ 2

X

> ℓ=1

sinc( θℓr), (A9) Substituting the resulting encoder into the TIE attention score yields the attention score Equation (5) in Equation (7) 

Theorem A.3 (Dirac-kernel TIE yields DoTE ). If TIE is instantiated with Dirac kernels concen-trated at the interval boundaries, i.e., μI,s = δts and μI,e = δte on the two channel groups of 

k = k(s) ⊕ k(e), then the resulting interval encoder is exactly the boundary-only form DoTE :

DoTE( k, I ) = Concat (RoPE( k(s), t s), RoPE( k(e), t e)) . (A10) 

Proof of Theorem A.3. Let k = k(s) ⊕ k(e) and instantiate TIE on the two channel groups with the Dirac kernels μI,s = δts and μI,e = δte . Because each Dirac kernel has unit mass, the corresponding normalization is C(μI,s ) = C(μI,e ) = 1 . Applying TIE to the two subspaces gives 

TIE s(k(s), I ) = RoPE( k(s), t s), TIE e(k(e), I ) = RoPE( k(e), t e). (A11) Concatenating the two channel groups yields 

TIE( k, I ) = Concat (RoPE( k(s), t s), RoPE( k(e), t e)) = DoTE( k, I ), (A12) which is exactly the DoTE . Since the construction keeps only two boundary atoms, it is a boundary-only specialization of TIE and does not average over the interval interior. 

Theorem A.4 (Expected robustness of RoTE to timestamp noise) . Define the unscaled interval-attention score 

si,j (c, r ) := RoPE( qi, m i)⊤RoTE( kj , c, r ), RoTE( k, c, r ) = C−1 

> r

Rc,r k. (A13) 

For event Ij = [ tsj , t ej ], let cj = ( tsj +tej )/2 and rj = ( tej −tsj )/2 > 0. Suppose its observed endpoints are etsj = tsj + ϵsj , etej = tej + ϵej , |ϵsj |, |ϵej | ≤ δ < r j a.s. (A14) 

Write 

∆cj := ϵsj + ϵej

2 , ∆rj := ϵej − ϵsj

2 , ecj = cj + ∆ cj , erj = rj + ∆ rj . (A15) 

Assume the normalization does not degenerate on the perturbed radius range, 

Cmin ,j := inf    

> ρ∈[rj−δ,r j+δ]

|Cρ| > 0. (A16) 

Then 

|si,j (ecj , erj ) − si,j (cj , r j )| ≤ ∥qi∥ ∥ kj ∥ δrj − δ

3

Cmin ,j 

+ 2

C2min ,j 

!

. (A17) 

Therefore, if δ ≤ rj /2 and Cmin ,j is bounded away from zero, RoTE has expected noise sensitivity 

O(∥qi∥ ∥ kj ∥ δ/r j ). By contrast, point-wise RoPE and boundary-only DoTE have local worst-case timestamp sensitivity O(∥qi∥ ∥ kj ∥ θmax δ), where θmax := max ℓ θℓ, with no decay in the interval radius rj .

17 Proof of Theorem 3.3. Let 

Φ( c, r ) := C−1 

> r

Rc,r , si,j (c, r ) = RoPE( qi, m i)⊤Φ( c, r )kj . (A18) Since RoPE is an orthogonal block rotation, ∥RoPE( qi, m i)∥ = ∥qi∥.We first bound the derivatives of Φ. For each frequency block, 

R(ℓ) 

> c,r

= sinc( θℓr)

cos( θℓc) − sin( θℓc)sin( θℓc) cos( θℓc)



. (A19) The rotation matrix has operator norm one and | sinc( x)| ≤ 1, so 

∥Rc,r ∥op ≤ 1. (A20) For r > 0, blockwise differentiation gives 

∥∂cRc,r ∥op = max  

> ℓ

θℓ| sinc( θℓr)| = max 

> ℓ

| sin( θℓr)|

r ≤ 1

r . (A21) Similarly, since 

θ sinc ′(θr ) = cos( θr ) − sinc( θr )

r , (A22) we have 

∥∂r Rc,r ∥op = max  

> ℓ

|θℓ sinc ′(θℓr)| ≤ 2

r . (A23) Moreover, 

Cr = 2

d

> d/ 2

X

> ℓ=1

sinc( θℓr) =⇒ |C′ 

> r

| ≤ 2

d

> d/ 2

X

> ℓ=1

|θℓ sinc ′(θℓr)| ≤ 2

r . (A24) On ρ ∈ [rj − δ, r j + δ], we have |Cρ| ≥ Cmin ,j and ρ ≥ rj − δ. Hence 

∥∂cΦ( c, ρ )∥op ≤ 1

Cmin ,j (rj − δ) , (A25) and, using ∂r Φ = C−1 

> r

∂r Rc,r − C′ 

> r

C−2 

> r

Rc,r ,

∥∂r Φ( c, ρ )∥op ≤ 1

rj − δ

2

Cmin ,j 

+ 2

C2min ,j 

!

. (A26) Now fix one realization of the endpoint perturbation. Write x = ( cj , r j ) and ∆ = (∆ cj , ∆rj ). Since 

|∆rj | ≤ δ, every point on the line segment x + τ ∆, τ ∈ [0 , 1] , has radius in [rj − δ, r j + δ]. By the fundamental theorem of calculus in the finite-dimensional matrix space, 

Φ( x + ∆) − Φ( x) = 

Z 10

DΦ( x + τ ∆)[∆] dτ 

=

Z 10

(∆ cj ∂cΦ( x + τ ∆) + ∆ rj ∂r Φ( x + τ ∆)) dτ. (A27) Taking operator norms and using the triangle inequality gives 

∥Φ( x + ∆) − Φ( x)∥op ≤ | ∆cj | sup  

> τ∈[0 ,1]

∥∂cΦ( x + τ ∆) ∥op 

+ |∆rj | sup  

> τ∈[0 ,1]

∥∂r Φ( x + τ ∆) ∥op 

≤ 1

rj − δ

"

|∆cj |

Cmin ,j 

+ 2

Cmin ,j 

+ 2

C2min ,j 

!

|∆rj |

#

. (A28) This is the operator-valued mean-value inequality; it does not require an equality-form mean value theorem for the operator norm. 18 Therefore, 

|si,j (ecj , erj ) − si,j (cj , r j )|

= RoPE( qi, m i)⊤ (Φ( ecj , erj ) − Φ( cj , r j )) kj

≤ ∥ qi∥ ∥ kj ∥ ∥ Φ( ecj , erj ) − Φ( cj , r j )∥op . (A29) Since |ϵsj |, |ϵej | ≤ δ almost surely, we also have |∆cj |, |∆rj | ≤ δ, which gives Equation (A17). Finally, for point-wise RoPE , let Rt be the standard RoPE rotation. Blockwise differentiation gives 

ddt Rt

> op

= max  

> ℓ

θℓ = θmax . (A30) Hence the same line-integral argument yields 

∥Rt+ϵ − Rt∥op ≤ θmax |ϵ|, (A31) and this local worst-case Lipschitz scale is independent of any interval radius. The boundary-only 

DoTE encoder is a concatenation of two point-wise encoders at ts and te, so it has the same order of timestamp sensitivity and no 1/r j decay. 

A.2 Algorithm 

Here is the demonstrative code for TIE : 

> 1

def RoTE ( start , end , theta =10000.0 , scaling_factor =4.0 , alpha =1.0 , dim =128) :  

> 2

# Assuming start , end are torch . Tensor of shape (b , t )  

> 3

center = ( start + end ) * scaling_factor / 2.0  

> 4

radius = ( end - start ) * scaling_factor / 2.0  

> 5

freqs = 1.0 / ( theta ** ( torch . arange (0 , dim , 2) . double () / dim ) ) . to ( start . device )  

> 6

theta = torch . einsum ( " bi ,j - > bij " , center , freqs )  

> 7

cos , sin = theta . cos () , theta . sin ()  

> 8

phi = torch . einsum ( " bi ,j - > bij " , radius , freqs )  

> 9

sincs = torch . sinc ( alpha * phi / torch . pi )  

> 10

sincs = sincs / torch . mean ( sincs , dim = -1 , keepdim = True )  

> 11

cos , sin = cos * sincs , sin * sincs  

> 12

return cos [: , : , None , :] , sin [: , : , None , :]  

> 13 14

def RoTE_apply (x , cos , sin , num_heads ) :  

> 15

x = rearrange (x , " b ␣ s ␣ ( n ␣ u ␣ h ) ␣ ->␣ b ␣ s ␣ n ␣ u ␣ h " , n = num_heads , u =2)  

> 16

x_out = torch . cat ([ x [: , : , : , 0 , :] * cos - x [: , : , : , 1 , :] * sin , x [: , : , : , 0 , :] * sin + x [: , : , : , 1 , :] * cos ] , dim = -1) . flatten (2)  

> 17

return x_out . to ( x . dtype ) 

A.3 RoTE Visualization 

Figure A1 & A2 show a visualization case for RoTE decaying. Events with longer duration decay slower along the time interval. 

## B Dataset 

B.1 Data Construction via Self-Reflective Agent 

Since interval-based modeling requires temporally precise and structured event supervision, we construct a large-scale dataset using a self-reflective annotation agent. 19 Video Sequence              

> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 1.1
> Person
> Decay Rate
> Jump & Attack Roll Jump & Attack Cont. Attack
> 012345
> Time (s)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 1.1
> Boss
> Decay Rate
> Side Dash Idle
> r=0.25 r=0.50 r=0.75 r=1.00 r=1.50

Figure A1: RoTE Visualization: The curves show the decaying effect of each event. 0 2 4 6 8

Time t      

> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Decaying Rate
> r= 0
> r= 1
> r= 2
> r= 3
> r= 4
> r= 5

Figure A2: RoTE Decaying Rate: We visualize the relative decaying rate of our RoTE when γ = 4 .0.For a video clip of 10s long, we fix the middle point of the event at 5.0s and vary the radius r of event. When r = 0 , RoTE generally reduces to normal RoPE . While a larger r dampens the decaying rate. For a long event that sustains for 10 seconds ( r = 5 ), the decaying rate remains above 0.9 during the whole event duration. 

B.1.1 The Structured Generation 

We employ a large-scale vision-language model (Qwen3-A30B [ 25 ]) to generate dense video anno-tations. To ensure data parseability and consistency, we enforce a strict JSON schema rather than allowing free-form textual output. The prompt is designed to guide the model through a hierarchical decomposition of the video content: it must first explicitly define participant identities (e.g., tracking visual attributes like clothing) and global scene context before generating detailed event timelines. Additionally, we leverage Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting [ 36 ], requiring the model to explicitly reason about visual anchors and temporal continuity before finalizing the event logs. Details about the prompt can be found in Section B.2. 

B.1.2 The Verification Criteria 

All verification criteria are designed to enforce consistency with the interval-based event formulation introduced in Section 3.1. To mitigate the common issue of temporal hallucination in VLMs, we implement a verification mechanism anchored by ground-truth metadata. Crucially, we explicitly inject the precise video duration (extracted via FFmpeg) into the system prompt. This serves as a hard boundary, preventing the model from generating events that exceed the physical limits of the video. Building on this ground truth, we enforce a set of deterministic constraints: 20 Figure A3: Overview of the Self-Reflective Video Annotation Pipeline. The system constructs high-fidelity datasets through three iterative stages: (1) Structured Generation , employing Qwen3-A30B with CoT reasoning and hierarchical decomposition under a strict JSON schema ; (2) Dual-Track Verification , which enforces deterministic constraints (temporal/logical filters) and semantic self-checks to ensure identity and action fidelity; and (3) a Refinement Loop , where detected failures trigger agentic self-correction via structured error feedback. This workflow effectively eliminates temporal hallucinations and ensures the plausibility of the final corpus. 

Figure A4: Textual Tokens with Timestamps: The captions for videos are structured and timestamped, which could be utilized to annotate every token with an accurate start time and end time. In this case, the caption describes the scene, the characters and objects, the background, behaviors and camera motions in detail. Every event is annotated with timestamps of start and end at the accuracy of 0.25 s.

Temporal Alignment All timestamps are strictly quantized to a 0.25s grid. This discretization is specifically designed to align with the temporal granularity of our downstream video generation backbone (operating at 16 fps), ensuring that text-conditioned events map precisely to video frame blocks. Figure A4 gives an example of the timestamps. 

Validity Checks We apply a series of logical filters to ensure the physical and semantic plausibility of the annotations. First, we enforce that every event’s end time must strictly follow its start time, eliminating invalid negative durations. Second, to ensure clear action boundaries, we prohibit overlapping events within the same action track to ensure atomic action definition. This guarantees that distinct actions do not conflict in the timeline. Third, we impose a minimum duration threshold of 1.0s. This filter removes fleeting micro-actions that are too brief for stable video generation, ensuring that every annotated event represents a significant and renderable motion phase. 

Semantic Consistency While rule-based checks ensure structural validity, they cannot detect se-mantic errors (e.g., hallucinated objects or identity swaps). To address this, we introduce a semantic self-verification step. In this phase, we feed the generated timeline back into the VLM alongside the original video, instructing the model to act as an independent critic. The VLM is tasked with verifying two critical aspects: • Identity Consistency It checks whether the visual attributes described in the text (e.g., "person in the red shirt") remain consistent with the pixel-level visual information throughout the video, flagging any identity switches. 21 • Action Fidelity It assesses whether the captioned actions (e.g., "picking up a cup") accurately reflect the actual motion dynamics observed in the video frames. If the VLM detects a mismatch, it outputs a specific error description, which triggers the refinement loop. This semantic verification step improves annotation reliability but is not required at inference time. 

B.1.3 The Refinement Loop 

This mechanism serves as the core of our agentic workflow, enabling the system to self-correct rather than simply discarding imperfect generations. When an annotation fails either the programmatic validity checks or the semantic self-verification, the specific error message (e.g., "Event 3 duration 0.5s is less than 1.0s threshold" or "Identity mismatch at 4.5s") is formulated as structured feedback. We inject this feedback directly into the prompt for the next inference cycle, explicitly instructing the VLM to reflect on its previous error. 

B.2 Construction of the PexelsEvents 

Here is our annotation structure for PexelsEvents:  

> 1

{ " scene_clarity " : " Clear | Cluttered | Chaotic " ,  

> 2

" global_caption " : { 

> 3

" short_caption " : " Concise summary of scene ( NO PEOPLE / ACTION ) , ~ 2 0 words ." ,  

> 4

" long_caption " : " Detailed description of environment and static objects ( NO PEOPLE ) , ~ 6 0 words ." ,  

> 5

" visible_objects " : [ " list " , " of " , " all " , " distinct " , " objects " , " visible " ] ,  

> 6

" start_time " : 0 . 0 ,  

> 7

" end_time " : < duration : . 2f > } ,  

> 8

" participants " : { 

> 9

" participant_id " : { 

> 10

" short_description " : " Short description starting with ID ." ,  

> 11

" long_description " : " Detailed description starting with ID , distinguishing features ." ,  

> 12

" start_time " : " float ( Exact time of first appearance ) " ,  

> 13

" end_time " : " float ( Exact time of last disappearance ) " ,  

> 14

" timeline " : [ 

> 15

{ 

> 16

" distinguishing_feature " : " Visual check ( e . g . , ’ red shirt ’) ." ,  

> 17

" start_time " : float ,  

> 18

" end_time " : float ,  

> 19

" is_interaction " : boolean ,  

> 20

" interaction_with " : [ " other_id " ] ,  

> 21

" short_caption " : " Verb + object ..." ,  

> 22

" long_caption " : " Detailed phase log starting with ID . Max 5 0 words . Include start / end positions and specific body part used ."  

> 23

} 

> 24

] 

> 25

} 

> 26

} ,  

> 27

" statistics " : { 

> 28

" video_quality_score " : 1 -5 ,  

> 29

" max_events_count " : int ,  

> 30

" participants_with_max_events " : [ " id " ] ,  

> 31

" is_suitable_for_learning " : boolean  

> 32

} 

> 33

}

Figure A5 shows an example from PexelsEvents. 22 Figure A5: An example from PexelsEvents : global descriptions and event-level descriptions are provided. 

B.3 Construction of the GameEvents 

We collect 128 hours of Elden Ring gameplay videos. Videos are recorded by OBS. All behaviors of player and bosses are recorded by reading the real-time animation ID from the game memory. Then we transform these records into 80k 10-second video clips with structured annotations. Figure A6 shows an example data containing high-dynamic fast-speed interactions of the player and the boss. 

Figure A6: An example from GameEvents : representative animation sequences with detailed event annotations. 

B.4 Construction of the RoboticsEvents 

We select 86k 10-second video clips from Agibot-World dataset. Which covers several manipulation tasks (including some scenes with human intervention). We filter the recorded trajectories and split them into sub-pieces. We feed VLM with information of these trajectory segments to generate more accurate structured prompts that describe behaviors of each arm and gripper. Figure A7 shows an example data containing complex interactions of robot and human operator. 

B.5 Dataset Statistics 

We report several statistics about our OmniEvents dataset in Table A1. The Overlap Prob. indicates the probability that a single event could happen with another one at the same time. These three parts of OmniEvents covers from low-speed ( PexelsEvents ) to high-speed ( GameEvents ).                             

> Dataset Video Clips EC ED TE TD TL Overlap Prob.
> PexelsEvents 253,903 4.72 3.67 1,197,973 4,391,589 164,639,876 68.0%
> GameEvents 79,959 16.01 1.24 1,280,208 1,584,762 42,368,009 99.63%
> RoboticsEvents 85,956 14.47 2.79 1,244,058 3,472,766 86,717,027 99.99%

Table A1: Statistics of OmniEvents . EC and ED denote the average number of events per sample and the average duration per event. TE , TD , and TL denote the total number of events, the total duration of all events, and the total character length of all text prompts, respectively. Overlap Prob. denotes the probability of event overlap. 23 Figure A7: An example from RoboticsEvents : representative manipulation sequences with detailed event annotations. 

## C Human Evaluation 

Human annotation protocol. All temporal metrics are computed from human-verified event an-notations rather than automatic detectors. We randomly sample 100 prompts from the evaluation dataset. For each prompt, we generate one video using the finetuned baseline and one video using our method with TIE, resulting in 200 generated videos in total. Each prompt contains a set of requested events with specified target intervals. For every generated video, human annotators are shown the video and the corresponding prompt event list. For each requested event, they are asked to answer three questions: (1) whether the event occurs in the video; (2) how much the observed event start time deviates from the requested start time; and (3) how much the observed event end time deviates from the requested end time. We employ 10 human annotators and compute the final metrics from the average of their responses. Figure A8 gives the annotation user interface. 

Event representation. Each prompt contains a set of requested events E = {ei}Ni=1 . Each event ei

is specified by an event description, an actor, and a target time interval [si, t i]. For each generated video, annotators provide a binary occurrence label oi ∈ { 0, 1} indicating whether ei appears in the video. If oi = 1 , annotators additionally provide the start-time bias bsi and end-time bias bti with respect to the requested interval: 

bsi = ˆ si − si, bti = ˆ ti − ti,

where [ˆ si, ˆti] is the observed event interval in the generated video. For each event, we average oi, bsi ,and bti over the 10 annotators before computing the final metrics. 

Event Occurrence. Event Occurrence measures the probability that a requested event is realized in the generated video: 

Occ = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

oi.

This metric captures the most basic requirement of temporal control: the model must first generate the requested event before its timing can be evaluated. We compute it over all requested prompt events, so missing events directly reduce the score. 

Temporal Error. Temporal Error measures the temporal deviation between the requested interval and the human-observed interval. If an event occurs, we use the average absolute boundary deviation: 

TE i = |bsi | + |bti|

2 .

24 Figure A8: An example of the user interface for annotating temporal alignment. If an event is missing, its boundary deviation is undefined. We therefore assign the requested event duration as a missing-event penalty: 

TE i = ti − si, if oi = 0 .

The final Temporal Error is averaged over all requested events: 

TE = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

TE i.

This prevents a model from receiving an artificially low timing error by simply omitting difficult events. The event duration provides a natural penalty scale: missing a short event is less severe than missing a long event, while still being counted as a temporal failure. 

Order Accuracy. Order Accuracy measures whether the generated video preserves the before/after relations specified by the prompt. For each pair of requested events (ei, e j ) in the same prompt, we 25 compare their target center times: 

ci = si + ti

2 , cj = sj + tj

2 .

If ci < c j , then ei is expected to occur before ej . For occurred events, we compute the observed centers using the annotated biases: 

ˆci = (si + bsi ) + ( ti + bti)2 , ˆcj = (sj + bsj ) + ( tj + btj )2 .

The pair is counted as correct only if both events occur and the observed ordering matches the requested ordering: 

1[oi = 1 , o j = 1] · 1[order(ˆ ci, ˆcj ) = order( ci, c j )] .

If either event is missing, the pair is counted as incorrect. The final Order Accuracy is the fraction of correctly ordered event pairs: 

OrderAcc = 

P 

> i<j

1[oi = 1 , o j = 1] · 1[order(ˆ ci, ˆcj ) = order( ci, c j )] 

 N

> 2

 .

This metric evaluates global temporal structure. A video may contain many requested events but still fail the prompt if their sequence is incorrect. 

Overlap Accuracy. Overlap Accuracy measures whether events that are specified to overlap or occur concurrently in the prompt remain overlapping in the generated video. We first identify event pairs that overlap in the prompt: 

O = {(i, j ) : min( ti, t j ) > max( si, s j )}.

For each pair (i, j ) ∈ O , we compute the observed intervals from the human-annotated biases: 

ˆsi = si + bsi , ˆti = ti + bti.

The pair is counted as correct only if both events occur and their observed intervals overlap: 

1[oi = 1 , o j = 1] · 1[min(ˆ ti, ˆtj ) > max(ˆ si, ˆsj )] .

The final Overlap Accuracy is: 

OverlapAcc = 1

|O| 

X

> (i,j )∈O

1[oi = 1 , o j = 1] · 1[min(ˆ ti, ˆtj ) > max(ˆ si, ˆsj )] .

If either event in an overlapping pair is missing, the pair is counted as incorrect. This metric is complementary to Order Accuracy: Order Accuracy evaluates before/after relations, while Overlap Accuracy evaluates concurrency preservation. 

Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Rate. Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Rate (TCSR) summarizes whether temporal constraints are satisfied. This metric evaluates complete prompt-level temporal faithfulness as: 

TCSR = 1

|C| 

X

> c∈C

1[c is satisfied] .

A constraint is satisfied only when the required event or event relation is realized and its temporal condition is met. For event interval constraints, this requires the event to occur and its start/end deviations to fall within the annotation tolerance, that is • it is the start time of an interval constraint and the error from the ground truth start time is within 0.25s; • or it is the end time of an interval constraint and the error from the ground truth end time is within 0.25s. For order constraints, both events must occur and their before/after relation must be preserved. For overlap constraints, both events must occur and their observed intervals must overlap. 26 Rationale. These metrics are designed to jointly evaluate event realization, interval alignment, temporal ordering, concurrency, and full prompt-level constraint satisfaction. A key design choice is that missing events are explicitly penalized. Missing events reduce Event Occurrence, receive a duration-based penalty in Temporal Error, invalidate any related order or overlap pairs, and violate the corresponding TCSR constraints. This avoids a degenerate evaluation where a model appears temporally accurate only because it omits difficult events. By relying on human annotations of event occurrence and temporal deviations, the evaluation directly measures whether generated videos satisfy the intended prompt-level temporal structure. 

## D More Results 

D.1 Results on StoryBench 

For StoryBench, we rescale event timelines to 10 seconds and use the background description as a persistent event spanning the full video. TIE outperforms previous multi-event video generation method on FVD, CLIP-Event, and VideoScore dimensions, indicating stronger temporal organization and visual fidelity. 

Method FID ↓ FVD ↓ CLIP-Event ↑ VQ ↑ TC ↑ DD ↑ TA ↑

MinT 40.87 484.44 0.270 2.56 2.44 3.32 2.92 

RoTE 23.58 236.45 0.290 3.39 3.21 3.57 3.14 

Table A2: Text-to-Video Generation Result on StoryBench: The evaluation results of MinT come from their paper since they are not open-sourced. 

D.2 TIE as Prompt Extender 

A key advantage of TIE is its capacity for structured prompt extension. We use LLMs (e.g., Qwen3-Max) to expand simple VBench [ 14 ] prompts into our structured event representation. Compared                                    

> method Dynamic Degree Imaging Quality Aesthetic Quality Motion Smooth. Human Action Overall Consist. Subject Consist. Color Object Class Multiple Objects Spatial Relation. Tempo. Style Appear. Style
> Baseline 0.375 0.665 0.607 0.985 0.72 0.237 0.938 0.895 0.747 0.562 0.743 0.231 0.209 WanExtender 0.119 0.643 0.658 0.993 0.962 0.266 0.948 0.830 0.925 0.797 0.780 0.243 0.219
> RoTE 0.763 0.623 0.599 0.979 0.994 0.279 0.924 0.892 0.899 0.741 0.804 0.254 0.247

Table A3: Prompt Extending Results: These metrics are separated into four blocks related to Visual Quality, Motion, Consistency and Prompt Faithfulness. We find that WanExtender increases visual quality at the expense of dynamic degree, often producing nearly static scenes. In contrast, the 

TIE -enhanced variant significantly increases dynamic degree, retains comparable visual quality, and improves prompt faithfulness. to the official WanExtender , the TIE -enhanced variant shows superior fidelity to long-horizon descriptions. As shown in Table A3 and Figure A9, it generates more dynamic content that faithfully follows detailed spatial and temporal relationships, indicating that TIE provides a robust structured extension mechanism for complex video synthesis. 

Figure A9: Comparison Results between WanExtender and the TIE -enhanced variant: the original short prompt from VBench is “a cat and a dog”. VLM extends the short prompt into a series of consistent behaviors which result in an interaction between a dog and a cat. 27 D.3 Case Study on the RoboticsEvents 

In Figure A10, we show a case for precise temporal control of TIE. We adjust the time interval of one event of the right arm. The right arm should reach out to pull the door of the oven. We specify this accurate start time from 2.0s to 5.0s, TIE accurately performs the requirement, while the Finetuned one does not respond in time. 

Figure A10: Generation results on RoboticsEvents . We compare the temporal response behavior of the Finetuned baseline and TIE .

D.4 Boundary Experiments Performance for different numbers of entities and events Evaluation results with different amount of descriptions split can be found in Table A4, and results with different amount of entities split can be found in Table A5. We can see that with more events and entities, the temporal alignment of TIE 

consistently drops, while more descriptions provide more information and increase the video quality.                                           

> Description Count CLIP-Event ↑VQ ↑TC ↑DD ↑TA ↑FC ↑
> [3,4] 0.2846 2.977 2.941 2.803 2.741 2.853 [5,6,7] 0.2694 2.975 2.920 2.907 2.768 2.851 [8,9,10] 0.2394 2.965 2.900 2.943 2.822 2.837 [11,12,13] 0.2267 3.057 2.987 3.072 2.948 2.934 [14,15,16] 0.2138 3.293 3.285 3.290 3.093 3.220

Table A4: TIE Performance on various description count splits. 

D.5 Experiment Settings 

During all experiments, we use 32 H800 GPUs for training. All 720p models (on Pexels-250k Dataset) are trained in batch size 512 for 6,500 steps with a learning rate of 10 −5 and an AdamW [ 16 , 19 ] optimizer. All inferences are performed with 50 steps, with a CFG scale of 5.0. All 480p 28 Entity Count CLIP-Event ↑ VQ ↑ TC ↑ DD ↑ TA ↑ FC ↑                                          

> 10.2801 2.942 2.887 2.829 2.711 2.811 20.2400 2.971 2.897 2.949 2.837 2.821 30.2221 3.238 3.212 3.209 3.047 3.161 40.2140 3.176 3.157 3.140 3.109 3.120 50.2150 3.310 3.338 3.299 3.143 3.289 60.1977 3.299 3.308 3.371 3.176 3.241 70.2089 3.501 3.542 3.658 3.223 3.503

Table A5: TIE Performance on various entity count splits. models (on domain-specific datasets) are trained in batch size 128 for 20,000 steps with a learning rate of 3 × 10 −5.

## E Discussions 

E.1 Limitations 

Modern VLMs still may not be capable enough to generate such a heavy prompt. Since captioning events requires understanding high-FPS videos and long contexts. VLM could generally output hallucinated contents, mismatched entities and behaviors, inconsistent entities and many other kinds of factual failures. Reflective Agent can somehow refine these problems but for modern VLMs that require API calls, retrying for too many times could be expensive. 

E.2 Future Work 

We believe TIE can be naturally integrated with long-video generation paradigms, such as next-chunk generation with KV-Cache, resulting in the next-level AIGC visual content creation suite. And also there could be natural applications for data generation / enrichment like the embodiment-AI scenario and digital human. We are on the way to explore the new frontier of interactive, customized and content-rich visual immersion / creation. 29