Title: VEBench:Benchmarking Large Multimodal Models for Real-World Video Editing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03276v2

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:47:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# VEB ENCH : Benchmarking Large Multimodal Models for Real-World Video Editing 

Andong Deng 1,2,‡, Dawei Du 1, Zhenfang Chen 1, Wen Zhong 1, Fan Chen 1, Guang Chen 1,Chia-Wen Kuo 1, Longyin Wen 1, Chen Chen 2, Sijie Zhu 1,∗

1ByteDance Intelligent Creation 2CRCV, University of Central Florida Question: What is the best fit to add at the end of the current video clip? Please choose the footage and determine the corresponding t ime stamps.      

> Sharyn Alfonsi is asking how Nicholas Cage
> is influenced by German expressionists. The poster of the movie Metropolis
> Nicholas Cage is talking about several movies that influenced his
> acting skills, like the Cabin of Dr. Caligari, Nosferatu or Metropolis .
> He is imitating the mad scientist in
> the movie showing the robot hand.
> He is showing how he borrow the idea to his
> own movie Moonstruck in a famous scene.

(A) Famous scenes collection in the movie Metropolis (B) The famous scenes in the movie Vampire’s Kiss : Peter (Nicolas Cage) lectures Dr . Glaser 

(Elizabeth Ashley) on the simplicity of filing documents then proceeds to recite the alphabet .

(C) The famous scenes in the movie Moonstruck : A swooning Ronny (Nicolas 

Cage) tries to convince Loretta (Cher) that playing it safe won't make her happy .

(D) The famous scenes in the movie Moonstruck : Ronny (Nicolas Cage) 

recounts for Loretta (Cher) the story of his maimed hand. 

> 00:53 -01:03: He says “I lost my hand! I lost my
> bride!” and pointing his fake hand emotionally.

Reference Video 

Options: 

Question: What is the video editing technique used at the second cut in the video? 

Options: (A) Smash Cut (B) Jump Cut (C) Match Cut (D) Cutaway (E) Invisible Cut 

Question: What is the video editing technique used in the beginning of the video? 

Options: (A) Smash Cut (B) J -Cut (C) Match Cut (D) L -Cut (E) Invisible Cut 

> Audio

Figure 1. Examples of the two tasks in VEB ENCH . Video Editing Technique Recognition (top) detects the editing technique at a specified position; Video Editing Operation Simulation (bottom) first selects the most suitable footage from a candidate list and then localizes the proper segment based on a reference video. Correct answers are indicated in green. 

Abstract 

Real-world video editing demands not only expert knowl-edge of cinematic techniques but also multimodal reason-ing to select, align, and combine footage into coherent nar-ratives. While recent Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) have shown remarkable progress in general video under-standing, their abilities in multi-video reasoning and oper-ational editing workflows remain largely unexplored. We 

∗ Corresponding author, sijiezhu@bytedance.com 

‡ Work was done during the internship at ByteDance, San Jose, USA 

introduce VEB ENCH , the first comprehensive benchmark designed to evaluate both editing knowledge understanding and operational reasoning in realistic video editing scenar-ios. VEB ENCH contains 3.9K high-quality edited videos (over 257 hours) and 3, 080 human-verified QA pairs, built through a three-round humanAI collaborative annotation pipeline that ensures precise temporal labeling and seman-tic consistency. It features two complementary QA tasks: 1) Video Editing Technique Recognition , assessing mod-els’ ability to identify 7 editing techniques using multimodal cues; and 2) Video Editing Operation Simulation , model-

1

> arXiv:2605.03276v2 [cs.CV] 8 May 2026

ing real-world editing workflows by requiring the selection and temporal localization of relevant clips from multiple candidates. Extensive experiments across proprietary ( e.g ., Gemini-2.5-Pro) and open-source LMMs reveal a large gap between current model performance and human-level edit-ing cognition. These results highlight the urgent need for bridging video understanding with creative operational rea-soning. We envision VEB ENCH as a foundation for ad-vancing intelligent video editing systems and driving fu-ture research on complex reasoning. Project available at: https://vebench.github.io/. 

1. Introduction 

Understanding and reasoning over videos [7, 23, 28] are fundamental challenges in computer vision and multimodal intelligence. Traditional video understanding focuses on recognizing actions [16, 31], events [12, 41], and ob-jects [26, 37] within a single video, while recent work ex-tends toward temporal [9, 27, 35], causal [3, 5, 20], and cross-modal [18] reasoning. In contrast, video editing [4] presents a far more demanding setting that requires both expert-level editing knowledge and the ability to manip-ulate and combine video footage into coherent narratives. Situated at the intersection of video understanding and rea-soning, editing serves as a real-world testbed for studying complex multimodal cognitionhighly relevant to filmmak-ing [8, 24], short-form content creation [14, 33], and pro-fessional media production [15, 29]. Several recent benchmarks have begun to explore do-mains tangentially related to video editing and filmmak-ing [11, 17, 22, 34, 36]. VEU-Bench [17] investigates a range of editing techniques such as cuts and transitions, for-mulating questions that span from recognition to reasoning. ShotBench [22] emphasizes shot-level analysis and cine-matic attributes, including composition and camera move-ment. While these benchmarks have made valuable contri-butions toward advancing video understanding in editing-related contexts, they remain limited in two crucial as-pects. First, they primarily evaluate knowledge-based com-prehension on very short clips (e.g., the average duration of VEU-Bench [17] is only 6.22 s), relying almost exclu-sively on visual cues without considering audiovisual syn-chronization or long-range temporal context, both of which are indispensable for real-world video editing. Second, they overlook the operational dimension of editing: the process of selecting, aligning, and combining footage from multi-ple videos to create coherent narratives. This dimension requires multi-video reasoning and intent-aware decision-making, which remain largely absent in current LMMs. To bridge these gaps, we introduce VEB ENCH , the first benchmark that unifies both editing knowledge understand-ing and operational reasoning in a single framework. As illustrated in Figure 1, VEB ENCH defines two complemen-tary QA paradigms that together approximate human edit-ing cognition: 1. Video Editing Technique Recognition evaluates amodel’s ability to perceive and interpret editing tech-niques using both visual and auditory cues in long-form videos. Unlike prior datasets restricted to short clips, VEB ENCH features videos averaging 213 seconds with 

3.27 annotated editing cuts per clip, substantially in-creasing contextual depth and annotation difficulty. 2. Video Editing Operation Simulation extends beyond recognition to emulate real-world editing workflows. Given a reference video, the model must select and tem-porally ground the most relevant segments from multiple candidate videos, mirroring the decision-making process of professional editors. This task introduces the novel dimension of multi-video reasoning , assessing whether models can infer editing intentions and construct narra-tive continuity across independent sources. Together, these two tasks decompose the complex pro-cess of human editing into perception-level understanding and operation-level reasoning, allowing VEB ENCH to sys-tematically evaluate the progression of multimodal models from passive video comprehension toward active, human-like video editing intelligence. Beyond task formulation, the construction of VEB ENCH 

itself posed substantial challenges due to its multi-video, multimodal, and reasoning-intensive nature. We construct VEB ENCH through a rigorous annotation process involv-ing expert-curated video editing scenarios, ensuring high-quality and diverse coverage of both editing techniques and operational workflows. The benchmark comprises 3.9K

high-quality editing videos and 3, 080 QA pairs, covering a broad spectrum of cinematic and vlog-style content. All annotations are produced through a three-round humanAI collaborative pipeline, involving over 1, 400 working hours by a professional annotation team. This process ensures fine-grained temporal accuracy, multimodal synchroniza-tion, and semantic consistency across editing scenarios. Ex-tensive evaluations of both proprietary (e.g., Gemini-2.5-Pro [7]) and open-source (e.g., Qwen3-VL [28]) LMMs reveal that even state-of-the-art systems struggle on both subtasks. It highlights the substantial gap between current model capabilities and human-level video editing reason-ing. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We formulate a new, human-inspired video editing task that unifies knowledge understanding and operational reasoning , providing a practical testbed for evaluating complex multimodal and multi-video reasoning. • We introduce VEB ENCH , a professionally annotated benchmark featuring diverse, fine-grained editing scenar-ios collected from real-world videos and curated through a three-round humanAI collaborative process. 2• We present comprehensive evaluations across leading proprietary and open-source LMMs, showing that even the strongest models perform far below human-level on both subtasks, underscoring the benchmark’s difficulty and potential to drive future progress in video reasoning and editing intelligence. 

2. Related Work 

Video Reasoning of Video LLMs. Recent advances in LMMs have substantially improved temporal perception and reasoning in video understanding [6, 9, 13, 13, 30, 35]. VideoChatGPT [23] employs a simple, straightforward spatio-temporal pooling mechanism for visual representa-tion, while the LLaVA series [19, 21] introduces the anyres 

technique to unify the processing of both image and video inputs. Meanwhile, LongVA [40] and LongVILA [2] ex-tend the temporal context window of LLMs through multi-stage training, enabling reasoning over long-form videos that span several minutes. The InternVL [42] and Qwen-VL [28] families further enhance multimodal alignment and instruction following abilities across diverse video under-standing tasks. Despite these advancements, the perfor-mance of current LMMs on video editing remains underex-plored. However, video editing is a highly demanding real-world application that requires not only an understanding of visualnarrative coherence but also sophisticated multimodal reasoning across multiple video segments. To bridge this gap, we introduce VEB ENCH , a domain-specific bench-mark that rigorously evaluates LMMs in real-world editing scenarios, encompassing both expert editing knowledge and practical editing workflows. 

Video Editing Benchmarks. Video editing plays a cru-cial role in filmmaking, vlogging, and content creation, re-quiring both aesthetic judgment and narrative reasoning. However, most existing video editing benchmarks mainly emphasize recognition-level understanding (e.g., visual ef-fects, shot understanding, and cut-type recognition) rather than operational reasoning. For example, Edit3K [11] fo-cuses on aesthetic evaluation of visual effects within indi-vidual video clips. ShotBench [22] designs video-based QA tasks spanning attributes such as shot types, lighting, and camera movements, forming a comprehensive recognition benchmark. EditVid-QA [36] collects edited videos from social media to assess model understanding of meme-style edits and visual effects. Furthermore, VEU-Bench [17] ex-tends this line of work by examining video editing from intra-frame to inter-shot perspectives and establishing a three-level evaluation protocol covering shot, transition, and cut-type classification. Despite these efforts, current bench-marks remain limited in their ability to capture complex, real-world video editing scenarios. As shown in Table 1, they mainly focus on perceptual or recognition-oriented evaluations in short temporal context and ignore multimodal cues like audio to understand editing intent. Moreover, they neglect the operational challenges intrinsic to real-world editing, which requires reasoning across multiple video sources to construct a coherent and purposeful storyline. To bridge this gap, we introduce VEB ENCH , the first bench-mark that integrates real-world editing operations into the evaluation of multimodal reasoning. Unlike prior datasets, VEB ENCH jointly measures (i) knowledge of editing prin-ciples and (ii) reasoning over footage selection, editing in-tent, and fine-cut design, thereby offering a more compre-hensive and realistic testbed for assessing the capabilities of large multimodal models in video editing contexts. 

3. Benchmark                                             

> Datasets #QAs Avg. Vid. Avg. Cuts Reasoning Multi-Editing Audio Duration per Vid. Video Workflow
> Edit3K [11] ---✗✗✗✗
> ShotBench [22] 3,572 --✗✗✗✗
> EditVid-QA [36] 439 9.2s -✗✗✗✗
> VEU-Bench [17] 4,382 6.2s 1.0 ✓✗✗✗
> VEB ENCH 3,080 237s 3.3 ✓✓✓✓

Table 1. Comparisons between VEB ENCH and other video editing benchmarks. VEB ENCH integrates long-term videos and multi-video multimodal reasoning to emulate real editing scenarios. 

Human video editing is a two-stage cognitive process that integrates both knowledge understanding and goal-directed reasoning. Professional editors first perceive and interpret editing techniques, such as Match Cut , Jump Cut ,or L-Cut , to maintain visual and narrative continuity. Then they engage in operational reasoning, actively selecting, trimming, and arranging footage from multiple sources to construct coherent and emotionally resonant storylines. To-gether, these two stages reflect the essential duality of hu-man editing cognition: understanding how edits work and reasoning why they are applied. To emulate this dual struc-ture, VEB ENCH defines two subtasks that together approx-imate the real-world editing workflow as follows. 

3.1. Task Definition 

The first subtask, Video Editing Technique Recognition (TechRec) , focuses on identifying seven editing techniques, which together form the fundamental constructs of modern filmmaking and vlog production [4]. These techniques span both temporal transitions (e.g., L-/J-/Jump/Smash Cuts ) and semantic transitions (e.g., Cutaway, Match Cut, Invisible Cut ), requiring reasoning across visual, auditory, and nar-rative dimensions (see Figure 2). Unlike conventional video QA tasks, TechRec demands fine-grained multimodal perception, where success depends on recognizing subtle cues such as cross-scene audio conti-nuity, rhythmic pacing, and visual composition alignment. For instance, J-/L-Cuts rely on precise audiovisual synchro-3shot1 shot2 shot3             

> Current scene
> scene1 scene2
> Main scene Related scene Main scene
> scene1 scene2 scene1 scene2
> motion blur,
> occlusion, etc. scene1 scene2
> scene1 scene2
> Visual similarity Breaking Continuity
> Discontinuous Time Cut
> Jump Cut Invisible Cut
> Match Cut Smash Cut
> J-Cut L-Cut
> Cutaway

Figure 2. Video Editing Techniques Illustrations. The red arrows indicate the transition in video, and the yellow bars indicate the audio track. Best viewed in color. 

nization, Jump Cuts intentionally disrupt temporal coher-ence, while Match and Smash Cuts depend on high-level semantic contrast or continuity. In this task, models must determine the specific editing technique used at each tran-sition point within a finely edited videorequiring advanced temporal reasoning, multimodal synchronization, and con-textual understanding. Definitions and representative exam-ples of all techniques are included in the Supp. Sec. 1 .The second subtask, Video Editing Operation Simula-tion (OpSim) , mirrors the real-world decision-making pro-cess in professional video editing. Given a fixed topic, hu-man editors typically select suitable footage from a large pool and organize a coherent storyline by placing the cho-sen segments at appropriate temporal positions to produce a seamless edit. To model this process in a controlled and evaluable manner, we adopt a multiple-choice QA format, which simplifies the workflow while preserving the core reasoning challenge. Specifically, a pre-cut clip is provided as the reference video , and the mode must select and trim one appropriate segment from a list of candidate videos, then decide whether to insert it at the beginning or the end of the reference. Formally, this task can be represented as 

(A, t s, t e) = M (Vr , [V1, V 2, . . . , V n]) , (1) where M denotes the LMM, Vr is the reference video, 

[V1, V 2, . . . , V n] represents the list of candidate videos, and 

(A, t s, t e) corresponds to the selected video index and its start-end timestamps, respectively. This formulation allows for a standardized evaluation of a model’s ability to reason across multiple videos, infer editing intent, and perform pre-cise temporal localization. Notably, this subtask constitutes the first benchmark of multi-video reasoning in the context of real-world video editing. 

3.2. Video Collection 

All videos are collected from a public video platform. Due to the different objectives of the two subtasks, we employ different video sourcing strategies for each. 

TechRec requires videos containing a large number of editing points to generate challenging and diverse questions. To build such a corpus, we first leverage GPT-4o to gener-ate thousands of topics covering a wide range of categories (e.g., NBA games, emotional moments in movies, and mu-sic performances). For each topic, GPT-4o produces mul-tiple corresponding YouTube search queries (e.g., “ LeBron James highlight moments ”, and “ touching moments in In-terstellar ”), enabling large-scale retrieval of videos across different contexts and genres. 

OpSim demands videos with rich editing semantics and naturally interleaved narratives. We deliberately select in-terview videos featuring film actors, as they often alternate between main interviews and complementary B-roll footage (e.g., movie clips), naturally exhibiting cross-references, emotional reinforcement, and narrative alignment. We cu-rate samples from high-quality YouTube channels such as 

60 Minutes and GQ Iconic Characters to ensure both diver-sity and stylistic consistency. Finally, all collected videos are automatically screened using Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], which filters out samples with poor editing quality or unstable composition, ensuring that the dataset maintains a high level of visual integrity and narrative coherence. 

3.3. Annotation Process 

As illustrated in Figure 3, we design two dedicated anno-tation pipelines for the two subtasks in VEB ENCH , each involving a three-round humanAI collaborative annotation and verification process to ensure accuracy and consistency. 

Technique Recognition For the first subtask, annotators carefully inspect each fine-cut video to locate all transition points (timestamps) and label them with one or more of the seven defined editing techniques: L-Cut , J-Cut , Jump Cut , Smash Cut , Cutaway , Invisible Cut , and Match Cut .Each annotation undergoes three verification rounds: 1) an initial manual pass for labeling; 2) cross-validation by an independent annotator; and 3) final consistency review us-ing automated checks for audiovisual alignment, particu-larly for L-Cut and J-Cut . This triple-layer validation en-sures fine-grained accuracy and high inter-annotator relia-bility. With this high-quality metadata, we easily generate 

5-option multi-choice QA automatically. The question tem-plate can be found in the Supp. Sec. 2 .

Operation Simulation The second subtask follows a struc-tured multi-stage annotation pipeline that emulates real-world editing workflows, also validated through three itera-tive annotationreview rounds. In Stage 1 , all videos are first processed by Gemini-2.5-Pro to extract shot-level metadata and scene boundaries. In Stage 2 , given a target B-Roll, 40:00 -0:10, 

> A-Roll, …
> 0:11 -0:18,
> B-Roll, …

Stage1: LMM -assisted Metadata Generation Stage2: A/B Roll Paring 

Stage3: Option Videos Selection  

> High -quality
> Edited Videos
> Gemini -2.5 -Pro Metadata

… 

> Target B -Roll Temporally
> Proximate A-Rolls
> Search queries
> YouTube IDs
> Video Option Candidates

Stage4: QA Generation Stage5: QA Validation Answer & Distractors   

> Content
> Match Similar but
> different
> Paired A/B Rolls
> Timestamps
> Refinement
> Compare
> Timestamps
> Annotation
> Add temporal
> context
> Reference Video
> Video Options
> Question
> Answer Uniqueness
> Match with Target B -Roll
> VEBench
> Search queries
> YouTube IDs
> Video Topics Filtering
> Gemini -2.5 -Pro GPT -4o
> Static Scene
> Low Editing Quality
> …
> 0:00 -0:10,
> J-Cut,
> 0:11 -0:18,
> Match Cut
> Video Editing Technique
> Temporal Annotation
> VEBench
> Video & QA

(b) Video Editing Operation Simulation Annotation 

(a) Video Editing Technique Recognition Annotation 

> Video
> Database

Figure 3. Annotation pipelines of the two VEB ENCH subtasks. (a) TechRec : GPT-4o provides YouTube video search queries and Gemini-2.5-Pro filter video candidates; human annotators inspect the videos and finalize the editing technique labels. (b) OpSim : Gemini-2.5-Pro analyzes the selected high-quality edited videos and generate metadata; human annotators perform A/B Roll paring and refine timestamps; human annotators select option videos from the retrieved pool and annotate timestamp for the ground truth video; QAs are automatically generated based on the annotated data and human annotators perform the QA validation. 

annotators identify one or more A-Rolls with strong nar-rative or semantic connections. They specify the rationale for each A/B-Roll pair from eight predefined relationship types, and indicate whether the link is grounded in audio, visual, or both modalities. In Stage 3 , annotators locate the correct source video and its timestamps, then design three semantically plausible distractors (e.g., another scene from the same film, a similar scene from a different movie, or clips sharing the same actor or tone). Finally, the questions are automatically generated in Stage 4 given the template, and in Stage 5 annotators perform questionanswer valida-tion, namely reviewing all candidate clips, re-selecting the best-fitting option, and providing timestamp-level justifica-tions for any ambiguous cases. This three-round annota-tion pipeline ensures both semantic integrity and reasoning depth, yielding a high-quality dataset that faithfully cap-tures authentic multi-video editing cognition. More details of the annotation can be found in the Supp. Sec. 2 .

3.4. Statistics 

VEB ENCH comprises a total of 3.9K edited videos span-ning 257 hours, paired with 3, 080 human-verified QA in-stances, making it one of the most comprehensive resources for studying multimodal reasoning in real-world video edit-ing. The dataset is divided into two complementary sub-tasks ( TechRec and OpSim ), each capturing distinct as-pects of human editing cognition. For TechRec, the dataset contains 885 long-form videos and corresponding QA pairs. Each video averages 213 .6

seconds in length and includes 3.3 annotated editing cuts, covering a broad spectrum of styles and transition patterns (Figure 4). This subtask emphasizes the perception of editing rhythm, temporal coherence, and multimodal syn-chronization, posing a significant challenge beyond conven-tional shot-boundary or action-recognition tasks. For OpSim, we collect 783 reference videos and 2, 217 

unique candidate videos, forming multi-video QA settings that mimic real-world editing workflows. The reference videos average 51 .6 seconds, while the candidate videos are substantially longer ( ∼ 228 .5 seconds), providing rich tem-poral context for cross-video reasoning and segment-level grounding. This design requires models to reason across multiple sources, evaluate narrative coherence, and make operational decisions similar to professional editors. Overall, VEB ENCH not only achieves large-scale cov-erage but also embodies multi-level complexity, ranging 50 100 200 300 400 500        

> Duration (seconds)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> # Videos
> Video in TechRec 050 100 150 200
> Duration (seconds)
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> # Videos
> Reference Videos in OpSim 02000 4000 6000
> Duration (seconds)
> 0
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> 1250
> # Videos
> Option Videos in OpSim 37.2%
> 30.4%
> 16.5%
> 8.5%
> Editing Techniques
> J-Cut
> L-Cut
> Cutaway
> Match Cut
> Smash Cut
> Invisible Cut
> Jump Cut

Figure 4. Distributions of video duration and editing techniques in VEB ENCH . The long-duration videos and rich coverage of diverse editing techniques demonstrate the complexity of VEB ENCH .

from fine-grained temporal perception to high-level reason-ing over narrative intent. 

4. Experiment 

4.1. Evaluation Settings 

We conducted extensive experiments to analyze the perfor-mance of current LMMs and demonstrate the value of the new benchmark. Specifically, we evaluate two state-of-the-art proprietary modelsGemini-2.5-Pro [7] and GPT-4o [25], which currently achieve strong results on existing video un-derstanding benchmarks. In addition, we comprehensively assess 7 open-source LMMs from the Qwen-VL [1, 28] and InternVL families [42]. 

Metrics. For TechRec , we use accuracy as the evalua-tion metric following the standard protocol for multi-choice VideoQA tasks [6, 9, 35]. For OpSim , we report two met-rics: 1) OpSim-FS (Footage Selection Accuracy), the accu-racy of selecting the correct video option, and 2) Full-task performance, which evaluates both selection and temporal localization. For the latter, we compute a conditioned tem-poral Intersection-over-Union (tIoU cond ), i.e ., tIoU cond =

(

tIoU (p, g ), if Ap = Ag ,

0, otherwise , (2) where tIoU (p, g ) denotes the temporal IoU between the pre-dicted and ground-truth segments, and Ap, Ag are the pre-dicted and ground-truth video choices, respectively. This conditioned formulation penalizes models that select the wrong video source, thereby aligning evaluation with re-alistic editing workflows that require both correct footage selection and temporal precision. 

Implementation Details. For TechRec , we follow the standard VideoQA evaluation setup [6, 9, 35]. For Op-Sim , which involves multi-video reasoning, we note that most open-source LMMs (except Gemini-2.5-Pro [7]) do not natively support simultaneous multi-video input. To ad-dress this limitation, we concatenate all candidate videos into a single continuous sequence and insert on-screen text prompts to delineate the reference clip from each option (see Figure 5(a)). This unified prompting allows fair com-parison across models while preserving temporal coher-ence. Frame sampling for each model follows its official default configuration. Furthermore, to analyze the contribu-tion of auditory cues, we test two variants for each model (with and without subtitles) on the OpSim task, enabling a controlled comparison of multimodal grounding effects. 

4.2. Quantitative Results 

As summarized in Table 2, current LMMs exhibit se-vere performance gaps on both subtasks, revealing the fundamental difficulty of real-world video editing reason-ing. While Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] consistently outperforms all other models, its advantage mainly stems from its stronger audiovisual perception and temporal reasoning capabilities rather than true editing cognition. Even so, its overall per-formance remains far below the level required for practical editing applications. For TechRec , audio cues prove essential, especially for detecting J-/L-Cuts and Smash Cuts that depend on cross-scene sound continuity. Models without audio un-derstanding have poor performance, indicating a lack of multimodal synchronization awareness. Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] achieves the highest score, yet still struggles with fine-grained boundary detection and complex transitions in long videos. For OpSim , the challenge becomes even more pro-nounced. When restricted to footage selection (OpSim-FS), Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] performs comparably to GPT-4o [25] and Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct [28], suggesting partial rea-soning ability across multiple candidate clips. However, once the task extends to temporal localization, nearly all models fail completely, achieving tIoU scores close to zero. Only Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] produces non-trivial results, demonstrating limited yet meaningful temporal grounding. Overall, these findings confirm that existing LMMs are still far from human-level editing reasoning. The large performance gap highlights the unique challenge posed by VEB ENCH , where success requires joint reasoning over au-diovisual cues, temporal continuity, and cross-video narra-tive coherencecapabilities that remain beyond the reach of current models. 

The Impact of Subtitles. We further investigate the effect of subtitles ( w/ subs ) on the operation simulation task. As shown in Table 2, the presence of subtitles consistently im-proves model performance across both subtasks. For exam-ple, in the OpSim-FS setting, Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] improves from 41 .25% to 44 .44% , and Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28] 6Table 2. Evaluation results on VEB ENCH . “TechRec” denotes the Technique Recognition subtask, and “OpSim” denotes the Operation Simulation subtask, where “FS” represents Footage Selection . The overall score is the average of TechRec and OpSim-FS. The bold text 

indicates the best performance.                                                                                             

> Models LLM Size Overall TechRec OpSim-FS OpSim w/ subs w/o subs w/ subs w/o subs w/ subs w/o subs
> Proprietary Models
> GPT-4o [25] ––33.29% 32.97% 24.68% 41.89% 41.25% 0.00 0.00 Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] ––39.55% –34.65% 44.44% –0.11 –
> Open-Source Models
> Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct [28] Qwen3 [32] 32B 34.36% 34.36% 28.99% 39.72% 39.72% 0.00 0.00 Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Instruct [28] Qwen3 [32] 30B 28.84% 31.65% 28.30% 29.37% 34.99% 0.00 0.00 Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28] Qwen3 [32] 8B 32.39% 33.86% 28.64% 36.14% 39.08% 0.00 0.00 Qwen3-VL-4B-Instruct [28] Qwen3 [32] 4B 30.20% 30.14% 28.60% 31.80% 31.67% 0.00 0.00 Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct [1] Qwen2.5 [38] 7B 28.74% 27.79% 27.47% 30.01% 28.10% 0.00 0.01 InternVL3-14B [42] Qwen2.5 [38] 14B 29.12% 28.55% 27.08% 31.16% 30.01% 0.00 0.01 InternVL3-8B [42] Qwen2.5 [38] 7B 27.99% 26.08% 25.21% 30.78% 26.95% 0.00 0.00 (a) On -screen Text
> (b) Frame Separator

Figure 5. Examples of two different visual prompts in the stitched videos: (a) On-screen Text and (b) Frame Separator. 

from 38 .52% to 39 .08% . This moderate yet consistent gain indicates that subtitles provide additional semantic ground-ing by explicitly linking dialogue or narration to visual context, reinforcing temporal alignment across shots. In essence, subtitles act as a lightweight cross-modal bridge, compensating for LMMs’ limited ability to infer narrative flow directly from raw audiovisual cues. 

The Impact of Visual Prompts. We also analyze the influ-ence of visual prompting strategies on model reasoning in the OpSim task. In Figure 5, beyond the default on-screen text (OT) used to mark reference and candidate clips, we introduce a frame separator (SP), a blank transition frame inserted between video segments, to isolate visual bound-aries. Based on Table 3, both proprietary and open-source models exhibit clear performance degradation when using separators instead of on-screen text. For instance, the accu-racy of Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28] drops by over 9% , and Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] declines from 44 .44% to 40 .23% . This demonstrates that continuous visual continuity cues (as pro-vided by on-screen text) are crucial for maintaining tempo-ral coherence and contextual reasoning, whereas abrupt sep-arators disrupt the model’s understanding of narrative flow. Overall, these analyses reveal that current LMMs remain heavily reliant on explicit linguistic or visual markers, such 

Table 3. The comparison of different visual prompts used in the operation simulation task. “OT” indicates on-screen text, and “SP” indicates the frame separator.              

> Models OpSim-FS OpSim-SL w/ OT w/ SP w/ ST w/ SP
> Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] 44.44% 40.23% 0.11 0.07 Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28] 39.08% 30.01% 0.00 0.00

as subtitles and on-screen text, to organize temporal and se-mantic context. It indicates their lack of robust internal rep-resentation for video continuity and editing logic. 

4.3. Visualization 

We present an example of the OpSim task in Figure 6. The reference video is an interview segment in which the actor discusses the energy of his character in the movie The Ad-ventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert , followed by a B-roll dancing scene. The goal of the task is to identify the most suitable segment to insert before the reference video. Intuitively, a coherent editing sequence would begin with a scene that visually introduces the characters energy and emotion, making option B the best choice. While options 

A, C, and D are thematically related, none establish a logi-cal narrative flow when placed before the interview. In this case, Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] produces a satisfactory predic-tion by correctly selecting option B and localizing the pre-cise timestamp, whereas Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28] and InternVL3-8B [42] generate irrelevant predictions, indicat-ing limited temporal and contextual reasoning ability. More examples can be found in the Supp. Sec. 6 .

4.4. Limitations of Existing LMMs on Video Editing 

Our evaluation reveals three major factors limiting current LMMs in real-world video editing reasoning: 7Model Input :                                                                                                                                                                                                    

> You are given astitched video composed of five segments in this exact order :
> (1)reference video, (2)option A, (3)option B, (4)option C, (5)option D.
> Each segment shows apermanent on -screen tag at the top -left corner :“reference video”, “A”, “B”, “C”, or “D” .
> Use these tags only to identify segments ;do not let them bias your choice .
> Among the options, there is ONLY ONE video that contains one or more segments that can be the best fit to add at the beginning of the reference video .Please choose the video from the options after
> carefully watching the videos and indicate the supporting time range by selecting the timestamps corresponding to the relevant moments within the option segment and report them on the stitched -
> video timeline .
> Return your final answer in ONE line only, using the EXACT format below :
> <LETTER> <start> -<end >
> Gemini -2.5-Pro Response :
> B4:47 .3-5:01 .8
> Qwen 3-VL -8B-Instruct Response :
> A0.0-16 .5
> InternVL 3-8BResponse :
> A0.0-15 .5
> Reference Video, 0:00 -0:20 :Guy Pearce talks about
> the energy of his character in the movie “The
> Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert ”.
> A, 0:21 -4:47 :Adancing scene in the movi e“The
> Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert ”.
> B, 4:48 -5:02 :His character is
> singing and dancing emotionally .
> C, 5:03 -8:35: " The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert ” won Oscar
> for Costume Design the at the 67th Annual Academy Awards in 1995 .
> D, 8:36 -9:22 :Bernade (Terence
> Stamp) comforts Adam (Guy
> Pearce) after being beat up .

Figure 6. Qualitative example of Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28], and InternVL3-8B [42]. 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 

Start 

End 

Gemini-2.5-Pro 

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 

Start 

End 

Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct 

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 

> Timestamp (s)

Start 

End 

InternVL3-8B 

Figure 7. Predicted timestamp distributions in OpSim for Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28], and InternVL3-8B [42]. It is obvious that Open-source models tend to predict early times-tamps in this task, while Gemini-2.5-Pro showcases a reasonable distribution. The average duration of the video is 941.67s. 

• Weak audiovisual integration. Most models treat vision and audio independently, failing to capture synchronized cues essential for techniques such as J-/L-Cuts. Without cross-modal alignment, they cannot reason about tempo-ral or emotional continuity across scenes. • Limited temporal capacity. Many LMMs handle only short sequences (e.g., InternVL3 [42] supports 64 

frames), missing fine-grained motion, transitions, and stylistic changes that real editing requires across hundreds of frames. In contrast, real-world editing demands fine-grained temporal sensitivity, requiring models to reason over hundreds of frames and seamlessly track semantic evolution across scenes. • Inaccurate temporal localization. As shown in Fig-ure 7, in the Operation Simulation task, open-source mod-els always predict timestamps near video beginnings (av-erage duration 941 .67 s), leading to near-zero tIoU scores in Table 2. Even Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], with a non-trivial tIoU of 0.11 , remains far from the precision needed for practical workflows. These limitations highlight the diagnostic strength of VEB ENCH and the urgent need for next-generation models capable of unifying multimodal understanding with goal-driven operational reasoning. 

5. Conclusion 

We presented VEB ENCH , a comprehensive benchmark for video editing that unifies both editing knowledge under-standing and operational reasoning . Unlike prior bench-marks focusing on perception within short single-clip con-texts, VEB ENCH highlights the dual nature of editing that requires not only recognition of editing techniques but also reasoning over multi-video composition and real-world editing workflows. The benchmark comprises two comple-mentary subtasks: Video Editing Technique Recognition, which evaluates the perception and comprehension of edit-ing styles, and Video Editing Operation Simulation, which challenges models to select and temporally localize suitable clips across multiple videos. Extensive evaluations on both proprietary and open-source LMMs reveal a significant gap between current model capabilities and the demands of au-thentic editing reasoning, even for state-of-the-art systems such as Gemini-2.5-Pro. VEB ENCH lays the groundwork for next-generation multimodal systems that move beyond 8passive video understanding toward human-level editing in-telligence and creative reasoning. 

References 

[1] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhao-hai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, Jiabo Ye, Xi Zhang, Tianbao Xie, Zesen Cheng, Hang Zhang, Zhibo Yang, Haiyang Xu, and Jun-yang Lin. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. 6, 7 [2] Yukang Chen, Fuzhao Xue, Dacheng Li, Qinghao Hu, Ligeng Zhu, Xiuyu Li, Yunhao Fang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Zhijian Liu, et al. Longvila: Scaling long-context visual language models for long videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10188 , 2024. 3 [3] Junhao Cheng, Yuying Ge, Teng Wang, Yixiao Ge, Jing Liao, and Ying Shan. Video-holmes: Can mllm think like holmes for complex video reasoning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21374 , 2025. 2 [4] Ken Dancyger. The technique of film and video editing: his-tory, theory, and practice . Routledge, 2018. 2, 3 [5] Andong Deng, Tongjia Chen, Shoubin Yu, Taojiannan Yang, Lincoln Spencer, Yapeng Tian, Ajmal Saeed Mian, Mohit Bansal, and Chen Chen. Motion-grounded video reasoning: Understanding and perceiving motion at pixel level. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 8625–8636, 2025. 2 [6] Andong Deng, Taojiannan Yang, Shoubin Yu, Lincoln Spencer, Mohit Bansal, Chen Chen, Serena Yeung-Levy, and Xiaohan Wang. Scivideobench: Benchmarking scientific video reasoning in large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08559 , 2025. 3, 6 [7] Google AI for Developers. Gemini models: Gemini 2.5 pro, 2025. Accessed May 15, 2025. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 12, 17, 18, 19 [8] Michael Frierson. Film and Video Editing Theory . Rout-ledge, 2018. 2, 10 [9] Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yondong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever compre-hensive evaluation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21075 , 2024. 2, 3, 6 [10] Chaoyou Fu, Haojia Lin, Xiong Wang, Yi-Fan Zhang, Yun-hang Shen, Xiaoyu Liu, Yangze Li, Zuwei Long, Het-ing Gao, Ke Li, et al. Vita-1.5: Towards gpt-4o level real-time vision and speech interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.01957 , 2025. 17, 18 [11] Xin Gu, Libo Zhang, Fan Chen, Longyin Wen, Yufei Wang, Tiejian Luo, and Sijie Zhu. Edit3k: Universal representa-tion learning for video editing components. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16048 , 2024. 2, 3 [12] Fabian Caba Heilbron, Victor Escorcia, Bernard Ghanem, and Juan Carlos Niebles. Activitynet: A large-scale video benchmark for human activity understanding. In 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 961–970, 2015. 2 [13] Kairui Hu, Penghao Wu, Fanyi Pu, Wang Xiao, Yuanhan Zhang, Xiang Yue, Bo Li, and Ziwei Liu. Video-mmmu: Evaluating knowledge acquisition from multi-discipline pro-fessional videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13826 , 2025. 3 [14] Bernd Huber, Hijung Valentina Shin, Bryan Russell, Oliver Wang, and Gautham J Mysore. B-script: Transcript-based b-roll video editing with recommendations. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–11, 2019. 2 [15] Kirsten Johnson and Jodi Radosh. Shoot, edit, share: Video production for mass media, marketing, advertising, and pub-lic relations . Routledge, 2016. 2 [16] Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang, Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Fabio Viola, Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. The kinetics hu-man action video dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06950 ,2017. 2 [17] Bozheng Li, Yongliang Wu, Yi Lu, Jiashuo Yu, Licheng Tang, Jiawang Cao, Wenqing Zhu, Yuyang Sun, Jay Wu, and Wenbo Zhu. Veu-bench: Towards comprehensive under-standing of video editing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 13671– 13680, 2025. 2, 3 [18] Caorui Li, Yu Chen, Yiyan Ji, Jin Xu, Zhenyu Cui, Shi-hao Li, Yuanxing Zhang, Jiafu Tang, Zhenghao Song, Din-gling Zhang, et al. Omnivideobench: Towards audio-visual understanding evaluation for omni mllms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10689 , 2025. 2 [19] Feng Li, Renrui Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Wei Li, Zejun Ma, and Chunyuan Li. Llava-next-interleave: Tackling multi-image, video, and 3d in large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07895 , 2024. 3 [20] Jiangtong Li, Li Niu, and Liqing Zhang. From representa-tion to reasoning: Towards both evidence and commonsense reasoning for video question-answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 2 [21] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892–34916, 2023. 3 [22] Hongbo Liu, Jingwen He, Yi Jin, Dian Zheng, Yuhao Dong, Fan Zhang, Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Yangguang Li, Weichao Chen, et al. Shotbench: Expert-level cinematic understanding in vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21356 , 2025. 2, 3 [23] Muhammad Maaz, Hanoona Rasheed, Salman Khan, and Fa-had Shahbaz Khan. Video-chatgpt: Towards detailed video understanding via large vision and language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2024) , 2024. 2, 3 [24] Christian Metz. Film language: A semiotics of the cinema .University of Chicago Press, 1991. 2 [25] OpenAI. Gpt-4o: Openai’s newest multimodal model. 

https://openai.com/index/gpt-4o , 2024. Ac-cessed: 2025-05-09. 6, 7 [26] F. Perazzi, J. Pont-Tuset, B. McWilliams, L. Van Gool, M. Gross, and A. Sorkine-Hornung. A benchmark dataset and 

9evaluation methodology for video object segmentation. In 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016. 2 [27] Yukun Qi, Yiming Zhao, Yu Zeng, Xikun Bao, Wenxuan Huang, Lin Chen, Zehui Chen, Jie Zhao, Zhongang Qi, and Feng Zhao. Vcr-bench: A comprehensive evaluation frame-work for video chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07956 , 2025. 2 [28] Qwen Team. Qwen3-vl. https://github.com/ QwenLM/Qwen3-VL , 2025. 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 17, 18, 19 [29] Leonard Shyles. The art of video production . Sage Publica-tions, 2007. 2 [30] Enxin Song, Wenhao Chai, Weili Xu, Jianwen Xie, Yuxuan Liu, and Gaoang Wang. Video-mmlu: A massive multi-discipline lecture understanding benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , pages 6099–6113, 2025. 3 [31] Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human actions classes from videos in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.0402 , 2012. 2 [32] Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. 7 [33] Hui Wang. Research on the application of nonlinear edit-ing technology in vlog production. In 2021 International Conference on Big Data Analysis and Computer Science (BDACS) , pages 246–249. IEEE, 2021. 2 [34] Xinran Wang, Songyu Xu, Xiangxuan Shan, Yuxuan Zhang, Muxi Diao, Xueyan Duan, Yanhua Huang, Kongming Liang, and Zhanyu Ma. Cinetechbench: A benchmark for cine-matographic technique understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15145 , 2025. 2 [35] Haoning Wu, Dongxu Li, Bei Chen, and Junnan Li. Longvideobench: A benchmark for long-context interleaved video-language understanding, 2024. 2, 3, 6 [36] Lu Xu, Sijie Zhu, Chunyuan Li, Chia-Wen Kuo, Fan Chen, Xinyao Wang, Guang Chen, Dawei Du, Ye Yuan, and Longyin Wen. Beyond raw videos: Understanding edited videos with large multimodal model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops , pages 503–512, 2025. 2, 3 [37] Ning Xu, Linjie Yang, Yuchen Fan, Dingcheng Yue, Yuchen Liang, Jianchao Yang, and Thomas Huang. Youtube-vos: A large-scale video object segmentation benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.03327 , 2018. 2 [38] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 , 2024. 7 [39] Boqiang Zhang, Kehan Li, Zesen Cheng, Zhiqiang Hu, Yuqian Yuan, Guanzheng Chen, Sicong Leng, Yuming Jiang, Hang Zhang, Xin Li, Peng Jin, Wenqi Zhang, Fan Wang, Li-dong Bing, and Deli Zhao. Videollama 3: Frontier multi-modal foundation models for image and video understand-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13106 , 2025. 17, 18 [40] Peiyuan Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Bo Li, Guangtao Zeng, Jingkang Yang, Yuanhan Zhang, Ziyue Wang, Haoran Tan, Chunyuan Li, and Ziwei Liu. Long context transfer from language to vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16852 , 2024. 3[41] Luowei Zhou, Chenliang Xu, and Jason Corso. Towards automatic learning of procedures from web instructional videos. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , 2018. 2 [42] Jinguo Zhu, Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Zhaoyang Liu, Shen-glong Ye, Lixin Gu, Hao Tian, Yuchen Duan, Weijie Su, Jie Shao, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Xuehui Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Xingguang Wei, Hongjie Zhang, Haomin Wang, Weiye Xu, Hao Li, Jiahao Wang, Nianchen Deng, Songze Li, Yinan He, Tan Jiang, Jiapeng Luo, Yi Wang, Con-ghui He, Botian Shi, Xingcheng Zhang, Wenqi Shao, Junjun He, Yingtong Xiong, Wenwen Qu, Peng Sun, Penglong Jiao, Han Lv, Lijun Wu, Kaipeng Zhang, Huipeng Deng, Jiaye Ge, Kai Chen, Limin Wang, Min Dou, Lewei Lu, Xizhou Zhu, Tong Lu, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, Jifeng Dai, and Wenhai Wang. Internvl3: Exploring advanced training and test-time recipes for open-source multimodal models, 2025. 3, 6, 7, 8, 17, 18, 19 

A. Video Editing Background Knowledge 

A.1. Editing Technique Definition 

In this section, we define and illustrate the seven funda-mental video editing techniques [8] included in VEB ENCH .Each technique is characterized by its modality (visual or audiovisual) and its unique function in shaping cinematic rhythm, emotion, and continuity. 

J-Cut (Audio Leads Video) [Modality: A+V] The audio from the next scene begins before the visual cut occurs, producing a smooth and anticipatory transition that connects scenes through sound continuity. Named after the shape of the letter J, this technique allows audio to lead the visual transition. Movie Example: The Wolf of Wall Street (2013), the well-known Mmm-hmm conversation between McConaughey and DiCaprio. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyH-a964kAs (0:10) 

L-Cut (Audio Follows Video) [Modality: A+V] The audio from the current scene continues to play after the video cuts to the next one, maintaining auditory continuity and emotional flow. It mirrors the letter L, where the audio extends beyond the visual boundary. Movie Example: The Tree of Life (2011) Young Jack opens and closes a door, and the creaking sound continues even after the visual cut, creating a lingering auditory bridge. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyH-a964kAs (0:53) 

Smash Cut (Breaking Continuity) [Modality: V only] A sudden, jarring cut between two dramatically different scenes in tone, sound, or content. Smash cuts heighten con-trast and shock, emphasizing emotional or narrative breaks. Movie Example: Reservoir Dogs (1992) A sudden alarm blast cuts sharply into the scene as Mr. Pink sprints down the street clutching the stolen diamonds while gunfire erupts behind him, creating a jarring, high-intensity transi-10 tion. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5Y5iqVNrls (0:430:49) 

Jump Cut (Time Condensation) [Modality: V only] A discontinuous edit that skips forward in time within the same scene while maintaining spatial coherence. Jump cuts condense time, speed up pacing, or create rhythmic tension in visual storytelling. Movie Example: Breathless (1960), directed by Jean-Luc Godard The protagonist walks along the street and abruptly jumps forward in the same motion path, showcasing one of the earliest iconic uses of the jump cut. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= fcRj0SXYh8 (0:591:13) 

Cutaway (Narrative Supplementation) [Modality: Vonly ]A cutaway momentarily departs from the main action to show a related shotsuch as a reaction, an important de-tail, or an environmental elementbefore returning to the pri-mary scene. Cutaways enrich narrative context, emphasize key information, build tension, or provide a smooth visual bridge between edits. Movie Example: An American Werewolf in London (1981) During the transformation sequence, the film abruptly cuts from the violent werewolf attack to a cheerful cartoon of Mickey Mouse, then cuts back to the attack. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WrIwfImLXOA 

Match Cut (Visual Matching) [Modality: V only] A transition that connects two visually or thematically sim-ilar shots to create a symbolic or continuous relationship. Match cuts enhance visual coherence and conceptual asso-ciation between scenes. Movie Example: 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) A bone tossed into the air cuts seamlessly to a spacecraft occupying the same position in the frame, creating one of the most iconic match cuts in cinema history. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iGuv1G3-f7w (0:270:31) 

Invisible Cut (Creating Artificial Continuity) [Modal-ity: V only ]An invisible cut is a seamless edit that hides the transition between two shots, creating the illusion of a continuous, unbroken take. The cut is typically concealed through fast camera motion, object occlusion, or brief darkness (such as passing behind a wall or a whip pan), preserving immersion and narrative flow. Movie Example: 1917 (2019) The film extensively em-ploys invisible cuts to maintain the appearance of a single continuous shot. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZAQoY3ioci0 

A.2. Video Editing Terminology in Interview Video 

Interview-style videos commonly rely on two foundational components of professional editing: A-Roll and B-Roll .Understanding these elements and how they interact are es-sential for analyzing and reconstructing real-world editing workflows. 

A-Roll refers to the primary interview footage, typically featuring the subject speaking directly to the camera or to the interviewer. It carries the core narrative, emotional de-livery, and informational content. A-Roll establishes con-text, provides continuity, and anchors the structure of the video. 

B-Roll consists of supplemental visual material intercut with the A-Roll. In interview videos, B-Roll may include movie scenes, archival footage, behind-the-scenes clips, en-vironment shots, reaction shots, or thematic imagery. B-Roll serves multiple editorial purposes: enriching narra-tive context, illustrating references made by the intervie-wee, smoothing transitions, reinforcing emotional tone, or providing pacing and visual variety. Modern cinematic interview formats (e.g., 60 Minutes, Variety, GQ) rely heavily on purposeful B-Roll selection. Editors choose and position these clips with careful in-tent, to visualize abstract ideas, highlight key roles or achievements, foreshadow upcoming discussion, or main-tain viewer engagement through dynamic visual rhythm. In VEB ENCH , these elements are essential for constructing the Operation Simulation task. To solve OpSim effectively, a model must understand how A-Roll and B-Roll segments are connected, why specific footage is selected, and how each clip contributes to the broader storytelling logic. This requires reasoning not only about visual-semantic align-ment but also about narrative intent, temporal continuity, and the editorial motivations behind placing a particular B-Roll segment at a precise moment in the interview. 

B. Annotation Details 

B.1. TechRec QA Template 

For the Technique Recognition (TechRec) task, each ques-tion is generated based on the temporal and structural char-acteristics of the editing technique in the annotated video segment. We design three categories of question templates to reflect different annotation conditions, ensuring coverage of unique, repeated, and long-duration editing events. Be-low, we summarize the three rule types and provide multiple natural-language templates for each. 

Unique Occurrence (Single Cut). If the target editing technique appears exactly once in the video, the question focuses on temporal localization of that single event. Ex-ample templates: • “When does the {CUT TYPE } occur in the video?” 

• “At what time does the {CUT TYPE } happen?” 

11 • “Locate the moment when the {CUT TYPE } appears in the video.” 

• “During which timestamp does the video apply a

{CUT TYPE }?” 

requent Cuts (Count-Based). If the technique appears re-peatedly (four or more times), we ask the model to count the number of occurrences instead of localizing each one. Example templates: • “How many {CUT TYPE } occur in this video?” 

• “Count how many times the video uses a {CUT TYPE }.” 

• “What is the total number of {CUT TYPE } in the video?” 

• “How frequently does the video apply the 

{CUT TYPE }?” 

Long-Duration Cut (Transition Range). If the editing technique spans a long temporal range (duration >5s), the question asks for identifying the editing type used over a specific interval. Example templates: • “What is the video editing technique used from {START }

to {END }?” 

• “Which editing technique is applied during the segment 

{SPAN }?” 

• “Identify the editing technique used throughout the inter-val {SPAN }.” 

• “What cut type is present in the time range {SPAN }?” 

Additional Positional Question Templates. When refer-ring to specific ordinal or positional cuts within the video, we additionally adopt complementary question forms: • “What is the video editing technique used at the second cut in the video?” 

• “What editing technique is applied at the beginning of the video?” 

• “Which editing technique is used at the final cut of the video?” 

These templates collectively ensure diversity in phrasing while maintaining structural clarity, enabling robust evalu-ation of an LMM’s ability to recognize and localize video editing techniques across multiple temporal conditions. 

B.2. OpSim QA Template 

For the Operation Simulation (OpSim) task, each ques-tion is constructed around the temporal relationship be-tween a reference A-Roll segment and its corresponding B-Roll segment that should be inserted into the editing time-line. The reference A-Roll provides contextual information from the interview video, while the target B-Roll represents the correct movie clip that needs to be selected and tempo-rally localized. To ensure temporal consistency with real editing work-flows, we design two complementary question templates depending on whether the target B-Roll should be inserted 

after or before the reference segment. The model must not only choose the correct footage from a candidate list, but also determine the precise timestamps that define the best-fitting segment. 

(1) Target B-Roll Appears After the Reference Video. 

When the correct B-Roll follows the reference A-Roll chronologically, the question instructs the model to identify the clip that best continues the current sequence: 

“What is the best fit to add at the end of the cur-rent video clip? Please choose the footage and determine the corresponding timestamps.” 

(2) Target B-Roll Appears Before the Reference Video. 

When the appropriate B-Roll precedes the A-Roll in the original edit, the question instead requests the footage that provides the most coherent lead-in: 

“What is the best fit to add at the beginning of the current video clip? Please choose the footage and determine the corresponding timestamps.” 

These two templates allow OpSim to capture realistic editing operations such as narrative setup, context reinforce-ment, and visual continuation. They also ensure that the temporal intent of each editing action is explicitly commu-nicated to the model, enabling accurate evaluation of both footage selection and temporal localization. 

B.3. OpSim Metadata Generation Prompt 

The metadata used for the Operation Simulation task con-sists of a rich, structured JSON representation that cap-tures both global editing attributes and fine-grained tempo-ral scene annotations of an interview video. The prompt for Gemini-2.5-Pro [7] is shown in Figure 8 and Fig-ure 9. As illustrated in the example shown in Fig-ure 10, each video entry contains high-level fields such as 

editing quality , interviewee , and detailed jus-tifications describing the editing style, pacing, and cine-matic integration of B-Roll footage. The core of the meta-data is the timestamp breakdown , a sequential list of short, non-overlapping segments, each annotated with pre-cise start and end times, a scene description, the inferred source movie (if applicable), and a scene type distinguish-ing A-Roll interviews, B-Roll cinematic inserts, intro/outro graphics, or narration overlays. For B-Roll segments, we additionally record their narrative purpose, a five-level uniqueness rating, a textual justification explaining why the clip is (ir)replaceable, and a set of five search queries that can be used to retrieve the original source footage. Together, this metadata provides a comprehensive temporal decom-position of the video and serves as the foundation for con-structing OpSim questions, selecting reference A-Roll, re-trieving candidate B-Rolls, and forming meaningful distrac-tors during dataset generation. 12 B.4. A/B Roll Pairing Rules 

A key component of constructing the Operation Simulation task is the pairing of A-Roll (interview footage) with B-Roll (movie clips, archival footage, or other illustrative visuals). To ensure that the B-Roll associated with each A-Roll seg-ment is semantically meaningful and reflects real editorial intent, we develop a structured annotation protocol that cat-egorizes the narrative function of each A/B Roll pairing into 

eight editorial relationship types . These categories cap-ture how professional editors use B-Roll to support, enrich, or shape the interview narrative. The eight relationship types are defined as follows: • Cause-and-Effect 

The B-Roll visualizes a direct outcome or consequence of what is being discussed in the A-Roll. It reinforces logical progression or explains how one event leads to another. • Illustration 

The B-Roll provides a literal visual depiction of a con-cept, object, location, or event referenced verbally in the A-Roll. This is one of the most common uses in interview editing. • Contrast / Comparison 

The B-Roll offers a contrasting example or a comparative visual that frames the current discussione.g., showing a past role versus a current role, or contrasting moods and styles. • Emotional / Stylistic Reinforcement 

The B-Roll amplifies the emotional tone, aesthetic, or at-mosphere of the interview segment. This type is often used to build mood or emphasize personality traits. • Example / Case Study 

The B-Roll presents a concrete example (e.g., a particular film scene or public event) that supports a general claim or theme mentioned in the A-Roll. • Contextual Background 

The B-Roll provides essential background information-historical, geographical, or biographicalthat situates the A-Roll content within a broader context. • Flashback / Archival Reference 

The B-Roll uses past footage, archival material, or retro-spective scenes to recall previous events or earlier phases in the interviewees career. • Symbolic / Metaphorical Link 

The B-Roll serves a symbolic purpose rather than a literal one. It visually expresses a theme, metaphor, or abstract concept mentioned in the A-Roll. These relationship types are used by annotators when pairing A-Roll and B-Roll segments during dataset creation. By explicitly modeling the editorial intent behind each pair-ing, VEB ENCH captures the narrative structure found in professionally edited interviews. This allows the Operation Simulation task to more faithfully reflect real-world editing workflows, in which selecting the “correct” footage requires understanding not only visual content but also the underly-ing storytelling logic. 13 Prompt (P1) Example for Video Metadata Generation 

You are an expert in film editing and visual media analysis. I will give you an interview video, and your job is to perform a professional multi-step analysis. The final output should be in strict JSON format. ---### Your Tasks 1. **Editing Quality Assessment** - Evaluate the overall editing quality of the interview video. - Rate it as one of: "high", "medium", or "low". - Consider transitions, pacing, timing to music/speech, and use of overlays. - Provide a detailed justification in "editing_justification". 2. **Dataset Suitability Decision** - Decide whether this video is suitable for inclusion in a multimodal dataset focused on edited cinematic clips. - Must include meaningful edits, cinematic framing (16:9), and exclude shorts or raw footage. - Output "Yes"/"No" in "suitable_for_dataset" and explain in "suitability_justification". 3. **Interviewee Identification** - Identify or infer the interviewee’s name from context or transcript. 4. **Timestamp-Based Scene Breakdown** For each scene, return: - "timestamp_start": e.g., "0:24" - "timestamp_end": e.g., "0:31" - "scene_description": visual content summary - "source_movie": name or None - "type": "A-Roll", "B-Roll", "Intro Graphic", etc. - "b_roll_purpose": narrative function (if B-Roll) - "broll_uniqueness": "Highly unique" or "Highly replaceable" (if B-Roll) - "broll_uniqueness_justification": reasoning (if B-Roll) - "source_search_queries": five YouTube/Google queries (if B-Roll) 

Figure 8. The prompt (P1) used for video analysis in VEB ENCH metadata generation. It asks the model to perform editing-quality evaluation, dataset suitability judgment, interviewee identification, and timestamp-level scene annotation in strict JSON format. 

14 Prompt (P2) Example for Video Metadata Generation 

---### Output Format (Strict JSON) {"editing_quality": "high", "interviewee": "Cillian Murphy", "editing_justification": "The editing uses smooth transitions, consistent pacing, cinematic overlay text, and strong color grading.", "suitable_for_dataset": "Yes", "suitability_justification": "The video features widescreen cinematic movie clips integrated into the interview.", "timestamp_breakdown": [{"timestamp_start": "0:00", "timestamp_end": "0:04", "scene_description": "60 Minutes ticking stopwatch intro graphic.", "source_movie": null, "type": "Intro Graphic", "b_roll_purpose": null, "b_roll_uniqueness": null, "b_roll_uniqueness_justification": null, "source_search_queries": null }, {"timestamp_start": "0:24", "timestamp_end": "0:31", "scene_description": "Cillian Murphy as Oppenheimer walking toward camera in Los Alamos.", "source_movie": "Oppenheimer", "type": "B-Roll (Movie Clip)", "b_roll_purpose": "Illustrates actor’s performance in his most recent role.", "b_roll_uniqueness": "Unique", "b_roll_uniqueness_justification": "This clip is directly tied to Murphy’s portrayal in Oppenheimer.", "source_search_queries": ["Cillian Murphy Oppenheimer hat smoking", "Oppenheimer walking scene", "Cillian Murphy Los Alamos clip", "Oppenheimer intro scene", "Christopher Nolan Oppenheimer footage" ]}]}

Figure 9. The prompt (P2) used for video analysis in VEB ENCH metadata generation. It asks the model to perform editing-quality evaluation, dataset suitability judgment, interviewee identification, and timestamp-level scene annotation in strict JSON format. 

15 Video Metadata Example 

"qj5MvD1bpMU": {"editing_quality": "high", "interviewee": "Timothe Chalamet", "editing_justification": "The video exemplifies high-quality broadcast journalism editing. It seamlessly integrates traditional A-Roll sit-down interviews, on-location walk-and-talk segments, and a vast array of B-Roll from a dozen different films and archival sources. The pacing is excellent, balancing introspective moments with dynamic musical performances. Transitions are smooth, and the use of film clips is always purposeful, directly illustrating the topics being discussed, such as Chalamet’s acting process , his specific roles, or his personal history. The audio mix is clean, and the color grading is consistent across the interview segments, creating a cohesive and professional final product.", "suitable_for_dataset": "Yes", "suitability_justification": "This video is highly suitable. It is a professionally edited, widescreen (16:9) piece that features a significant amount of cinematic B-Roll from numerous high-profile movies. The edits are strong and meaningful, using the film clips to enhance the interview narrative. It contains no vertical or user-generated content.", "timestamp_breakdown": [... {"timestamp_start": "0:51", "timestamp_end": "0:57", "scene_description": "The 60 Minutes stopwatch graphic appears again, indicating a commercial break .", "source_movie": null, "type": "Outro Graphic", "b_roll_purpose": null, "b_roll_uniqueness": null, "b_roll_uniqueness_justification": null, "source_search_queries": null }, {"timestamp_start": "0:57", "timestamp_end": "1:23", "scene_description": "A-Roll of Timothe Chalamet being interviewed by Anderson Cooper. The setting is a dimly lit space that appears to be a music venue or studio, with a purple-lit background. Chalamet discusses his high level of commitment to his roles.", "source_movie": null, "type": "A-Roll (Interview)", "b_roll_purpose": null, "b_roll_uniqueness": null, "b_roll_uniqueness_justification": null, "source_search_queries": null }, {"timestamp_start": "1:23", "timestamp_end": "1:50", "scene_description": "A montage of scenes featuring Timothe Chalamet as Bob Dylan. He is silhouetted against a spotlight, then seen from behind as he approaches a microphone on a stage in a large, classic theater, singing \"A Hard Rain’s a-Gonna Fall\".", "source_movie": "A Complete Unknown", "type": "B-Roll (Movie Clip)", "b_roll_purpose": "To visualize the central topic of the interview: Chalamet’s portrayal of Bob Dylan and the immense preparation involved.", "b_roll_uniqueness": "Highly unique", "b_roll_uniqueness_justification": "This is pre-release footage from a major biographical film. It is irreplaceable for discussing this specific role and showcases the actor’s transformation, which is the core of the segment.", "source_search_queries": ["Timothe Chalamet A Complete Unknown trailer", "Timothe Chalamet Bob Dylan singing", "A Hard Rain’s a-Gonna Fall A Complete Unknown", "James Mangold Bob Dylan movie clip", "Timothe Chalamet as Bob Dylan on stage" ]}, ... 

Figure 10. Operation simulation metadata example. 

16 C. Open-Source Omni Model Evaluation 

To further examine the capability of open-source omni-directional multimodal models on real-world video edit-ing tasks, we evaluate two representative Omni models on VEB ENCH , VITA-1.5 [10] and VideoLLaMA3 [39]. Both models are tested using the default frame-sampling strat-egy. Table 4 reports the performance of the evaluated Omni models across all the subtasks. Despite their audio-visual processing capabilities, both models exhibit clear limita-tions on VEB ENCH . They achieve only moderate perfor-mance on TechRec and OpSim-FS, and similar to most open-source LMMs, they fail to complete the temporal lo-calization component of OpSim, resulting in near-zero tIoU. These findings further underscore the gap between cur-rent open-source Omni models and the demands of realis-tic video editing workflows, which require nuanced tempo-ral reasoning, multi-video understanding, and fine-grained multimodal perception. 

D. OpSim-FS in Frame Index Evaluation Set-ting 

The near-zero scores on the full OpSim reflect a systematic failure in temporal grounding rather than an ill-posed eval-uation, which aligns with VEBenchs goal of diagnosing the gap between what content to use and how/where to execute edits. As shown in the Table 5, frame-index (FI) evaluation brings limited improvement overall, which indicates that the difficulty of OpSim stems from intrinsic challenges in tem-poral decision-making, rather than the evaluation setting. 

E. Data Imbalance Analysis 

This distribution largely reflects real-world editing practice, where techniques, such as Invisible Cut, are used much less frequently than more common transitions (J-Cut), and of-ten appear only in specific genres or stylistic contexts (e.g., Invisible Cuts in one-shot illusion). We provide a detailed accuracy breakdown by cut type here. As shown in the ta-ble, performance remains consistently low not only for rare techniques (Invisible Cut), but also for frequently occurring ones (L-Cut). This indicates that the observed performance degradation reflects the intrinsic difficulty of recognizing subtle editing semantics. 

F. More Visualizations 

To further illustrate the difficulty and diversity of the Oper-ation Simulation task in VEB ENCH , we provide two addi-tional qualitative examples. Each visualization compares the predictions of three representative multimodal large models: Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28], and InternVL3-8B [42]. In both examples, the stitched video is composed of five temporally ordered segments: one reference video followed by four candidate option videos (AD). The model must identify the only option containing the most suitable continuation of the reference clip and lo-calize the precise timestamps within that option segment. We show the full stitched timeline, annotated option de-scriptions, and each models predicted answer along with the ground truth and temporal IoU score. In the first example shown in Figure 11, the reference video features Kevin Bacon describing how his character makes exaggerated facial expressions in the film Animal House. The task asks the model to identify which option contains the best segment to append at the end of this refer-ence clip. Ideally, the correct answer should be a moment in Animal House where Kevin Bacons character is visibly making faces. Option A contains a related scene from the film but does not correspond to the specific moment de-scribed. Option B is thematically relevant but still does not show the correct facial-expression sequence. Option C con-tains a montage of Kevin Bacons representative works from 19782022, which is entirely mismatched for this context. In contrast, Option D includes the iconic I hate to seem pushy scene, where Bacons character performs the exact facial expression referenced in the interview. Gemini-2.5-Pro successfully identifies this segment with a high tIoU, while both Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct and InternVL3-8B fail completely, selecting unrelated clips. In the second example, shown in Figure 12, the refer-ence video contains an interview in which Nicholas Hoult explains how he created the zombie vocalization for his role in Warm Bodies. Therefore, when asked to identify the best segment to append at the end of the reference clip, the correct choice should be a scene from the film where Hoults character produces the distinctive zombie sound he describes. Among the four options, only Option B, the bar scene, includes a moment where the zombie emits a recog-nizable guttural sound toward another zombie. Gemini-2.5-Pro successfully captures this audiovisual cue and selects the correct segment with a strong tIoU. In contrast, the two open-source models fail entirely, largely due to their lack of audio-processing capability, preventing them from un-derstanding the crucial auditory evidence required for this task. These examples highlight the unique challenges posed by VEB ENCH , including cross-video semantic matching, fine-grained temporal localization, and reasoning about cin-ematic editing structure. 17 Table 4. Evaluation results of omni models on VEB ENCH . “TechRec” denotes the Technique Recognition subtask, and “OpSim” denotes the Operation Simulation subtask, where “FS” represents Footage Selection . The overall score is the average of TechRec and OpSim-FS. 

Bold numbers indicate the best performance. 

## Models Overall (%) TechRec (%) OpSim-FS (%) OpSim (%) 

## VITA-1.5 [10] 24.62 22.16 27.08 0.00 VideoLLaMA3 [39] 24.50 23.20 25.80 0.01 

Table 5. Operation Simulation performance under frame-index-based evaluation. 

Model Gemini-2.5-Pro GPT-4o Qwen3-VL-8B Qwen3-VL-4B Qwen2.5-VL-7B InternVL3-8B 

FI tIoU 0.15 0.08 0.04 0.05 0.04 0.00 Table 6. Accuracy Breakdown of TechRec by cut type. 

## Model J-Cut L-Cut Cutaway Match Jump Invisible Smash Overall InternVL3-8B 24.66 23.08 27.74 31.08 18.87 2.86 21.88 25.21 

## Gemini-2.5-Pro 38.54 31.24 38.99 35.29 36.36 13.64 29.73 34.65 

## GPT-4o 10.63 31.65 20.59 22.54 22.64 11.43 15.62 24.68 Model Input :

You are given a stitched video composed of five segments in this exact order :

(1) reference video, (2) option A, (3) option B, (4) option C, (5) option D.

Each segment shows a permanent on -screen tag at the top -left corner : “reference video”, “A”, “B”, “C”, or “D” .

Use these tags only to identify segments ; do not let them bias your choice .

Among the options, there is ONLY ONE video that contains one or more segments that can be the best fit to add at the end of the reference video . Please choose the video from the options after 

carefully watching the videos and indicate the supporting time range by selecting the timestamps corresponding to the relevant moments within the option segment and report them on the stitched -

video timeline .

Return your final answer in ONE line only, using the EXACT format below :

<LETTER> <start> -<end> 

Gemini -2.5-Pro Response :

D 40:44 -40:51 tIoU =0.51 

Qwen 3-VL -8B-Instruct Response :

C 29.0 -31.0 

InternVL 3-8B Response :

B 1 -15.0                                                     

> Reference Video, 0:00 -0:47 :Kevin is talking
> about his character making faces in the
> movie “Animal House”
> A, 0:48 -3:10 :"Animal House" has the Omegas
> hosting ameet and greet, shuffling Pinto and
> Flounder off to the corner with the other
> "undesirables" -the ethnic and disability cliches .
> B, 3:11 -11 :34 :Kent and Larry
> Rush the Omega and Delta
> Fraternities
> C,11:35 -40:42: Kevin Bacon: Filmography 1978 -2022
> D, 40:42 -41:01: The famous line
> “I Hate To Seem Pushy” and the
> character is making faces.

Figure 11. Qualitative example of Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28], and InternVL3-8B [42]. 

18 Model Input :

You are given a stitched video composed of five segments in this exact order :

(1) reference video, (2) option A, (3) option B, (4) option C, (5) option D.

Each segment shows a permanent on -screen tag at the top -left corner : “reference video”, “A”, “B”, “C”, or “D” .

Use these tags only to identify segments ; do not let them bias your choice .

Among the options, there is ONLY ONE video that contains one or more segments that can be the best fit to add at the end of the reference video . Please choose the video from the options after 

carefully watching the videos and indicate the supporting time range by selecting the timestamps corresponding to the relevant moments within the option segment and report them on the stitched -

video timeline .

Return your final answer in ONE line only, using the EXACT format below :

<LETTER> <start> -<end> 

Gemini -2.5-Pro Response :

B 123.0 -137.9 tIoU =0.37 

Qwen 3-VL -8B-Instruct Response :

C 8.0 -14.0 

InternVL 3-8B Response :

C 1 -11.0                                

> Reference Video, 0:00 -0:34 :Nicholas Holt is
> talking about how he try to make the
> zombie sound in the movie “Warm Bodies“ .
> A, 0:35 -1:37 :Warm Bodies 2013 -R meets Julie
> scene "Missing you" B, 1:38 -1:54: Warm Bodies 2013 -
> Bar scene
> C, 1:54 -4:01: Interview video of Nicholas Holt talking about
> Warm Bodies movie and mastering the zombie grunt.
> D, 4:01 -8:01: First 4 minutes in
> Warm Bodies 2013

Figure 12. Qualitative example of Gemini-2.5-Pro [7], Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [28], and InternVL3-8B [42]. 

19