Title: Beyond Perceptual Shortcuts: Causal-Inspired Debiasing Optimization for Generalizable Video Reasoning in Lightweight MLLMs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01324v2

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:45:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Perceptual Shortcuts: Causal-Inspired Debiasing Optimization for Generalizable Video Reasoning in Lightweight MLLMs 

## Jingze Wu, Quan Zhang ∗, Hongfei Suo, Zeqiang Cai, Hongbo Chen ∗

## Sun Yat-sen University, China 

{wujz3,suohf,caizq5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {zhangq689,chenhongbo}@mail.sysu.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Although reinforcement learning (RL) has significantly ad-vanced reasoning capabilities in large multimodal lan-guage models (MLLMs), its efficacy remains limited for lightweight models essential for edge deployments. To address this issue, we leverage causal analysis and ex-periment to reveal the underlying phenomenon of percep-tual bias, demonstrating that RL-based fine-tuning com-pels lightweight models to preferentially adopt perceptual shortcuts induced by data biases, rather than developing genuine reasoning abilities. Motivated by this insight, we propose VideoThinker , a causal-inspired framework that cultivates robust reasoning in lightweight models through a two-stage debiasing process. First, the Bias Aware Training stage forges a dedicated “bias model” to em-body these shortcut behaviors. Then, the Causal Debias-ing Policy Optimization (CDPO) algorithm fine-tunes the primary model, employing an innovative repulsive objec-tive to actively push it away from the bias model’s flawed logic while simultaneously pulling it toward correct, gen-eralizable solutions. Our model, VideoThinker-R1 , estab-lishes a new state-of-the-art in video reasoning efficiency. For same-scale comparison, requiring no Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and using only 1% of the training data for RL, it surpasses VideoRFT-3B with a 3.2 % average gain on widely-used benchmarks and a 7% lead on VideoMME. For cross-scale comparison, it outperforms the larger Video-UTR-7B model on multiple benchmarks, including a 2.1% gain on MVBench and a 3.8% gain on TempCompass. Code is available at https://github.com/falonss703/VideoThinker. 

## 1. Introduction 

Enabling complex reasoning in lightweight Multimodal Language Models (MLLMs) is critical for their deploy-ment in resource-constrained environments, yet it presents a formidable challenge. While fine-tuning methods based on  

> ∗

Corresponding authors. Query                 

> 🎬
> Obs-
> 👀
> Think
> 🤔
> Answer
> ✅
> Causal relationship
> perception shortcut
> Event 2
> ✅
> 👀 Observational Question ：What will collide without Yellow ？
> 🧐 Inferential Question ：What will collide without Cyan ？
> Event 1
> 1212shortcut
> 12
> ❌
> shortcut 3
> Observer ：
> Thinker ：
> Observer ：
> Observational Acc (%)
> 76.0 78.7 67.4 75.8
> 7B 3B
> 76.4
> Params
> Inferential Acc (%)
> 64.5 73.9 68.9
> 7B 3B
> 64.5 63.1
> Base Base + VideoRFT
> Base + GRPO
> Params
> ✅
> 3inference
> 1212inference
> ✅
> Thinker ：12

Figure 1. An illustration of observational versus inferential reason-ing and the trade-off in model performance. The top half defines observational questions that can be answered via perceptual short-cuts and inferential questions that require true reasoning. The bot-tom shows that fine-tuning boosts accuracy on observational tasks at the expense of the lightweight model’s inference. 

Reinforcement Learning (RL), such as Group Relative Pol-icy Optimization (GRPO) [1], have shown significant suc-cess in advancing large-scale MLLMs [2–6], their effective-ness surprisingly plummets when applied to smaller mod-els [7, 8]. This efficacy gap presents a critical bottleneck and raises an interesting question: Why do these proven RL 

> arXiv:2605.01324v2 [cs.CV] 5 May 2026 ...
> Rule-based Reward

👀  ❄ 

> Bias Model
> Step2 Maximize Difference 🔥 VideoThinker
> Rule-based Reward
> Group Computation
> Reference Model

❄

> Minimize Difference GRPO

# 🎬 ❓ 

> Policy Model

🔥 

# 🎬 ❓

👀  

> Bias Model
> Group Computation
> ... ...
> Policy Model

🔥 👀 Bias Dataset    

> 🔥 Step1 Bias Training
> 63.5 60.9 79.1 52.4 56.8 34.3
> ... ... ...

Figure 2. The difference between our framework and others. (Left) A conceptual comparison between our approach and a conventional baseline. ( Top left ) Standard methods like GRPO constrain the policy by pulling it towards a reference model. ( Bottom left ) In contrast, VideoThinker employs a “bias model” and a repulsive objective to push the policy away from learned shortcuts. (Right) The radar chart demonstrates the empirical success of this approach, showing that our model, VideoThinker-R1, achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance across multiple video reasoning benchmarks. 

techniques fail on these models? Our investigation suggests the answer lies in a funda-mental flaw within the training data. We identify a criti-cal problem we term “perceptual shortcuts,” which we find are alarmingly dominant even in widely used reasoning datasets like CLEVRER [9]. As illustrated in Figure 1, our analysis reveals that many questions are merely Observa-tional. For instance, a “without the yellow ball” query is non-inferential as the ball is causally irrelevant, allowing a model to succeed with a simple visual description (the shortcut). This contrasts sharply with Inferential questions, such as “without the cyan cylinder,” where the object acts as a causal blocker, making true reasoning mandatory. We hypothesize that this shortcut bias is the primary culprit, and that this problem is acutely amplified in 3B models. We argue their weaker foundational capabilities compared to larger 7B models [10–12] make them inherently more susceptible to being misled. To verify this, we designed a diagnostic experiment. The results revealed a striking “ca-pability conflict.” When a 3B base model [13] with strong innate skills was fine-tuned using GRPO, its accuracy on the critical inferential tasks plummeted from 73.9% to 63.1%. This confirms our hypothesis: the RL process, misguided by the bias, actively forced the vulnerable 3B model to un-learn its reasoning in favor of the shortcut. To resolve this critical fine-tuning dilemma and unlock the cognitive potential of lightweight MLLMs, our ap-proach begins with a formal causal analysis. We construct a structural causal model that models the fine-tuning pro-cess, which explicitly identifies a spurious “shortcut” path-way responsible for the model learning superficial corre-lations. Guided by this analysis, we propose the Video-Thinker framework, a novel framework designed to ig-nite robust reasoning by acting as a targeted intervention to block this undesirable path. VideoThinker achieves this through two core components, as shown in Figure 2. First, to operationalize the shortcut pathway, we construct a “bias model” trained specifically to emulate this behavior, serving as a negative exemplar of the reasoning to be avoided. Sec-ond, during fine-tuning, Causal Debiasing Policy Optimiza-tion (CDPO) employs an innovative repulsive objective. By using a negative Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence coeffi-cient, it transforms the regularizer into a repulsive force, actively pushing the primary model’s policy away from the bias model’s. This dynamic interplay, where reward attracts the model to correct answers and repulsion steers it from bias, which compels it to develop generalizable reasoning. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of our VideoThinker framework, as embodied by the performance of our model, VideoThinker-R1 (3B). In same-scale bench-marks, VideoThinker-R1 establishes a new SOTA, achiev-ing 60.9% on MV-Bench and 63.5% on TempCompass. This strong performance extends to cross-scale compar-isons, where it outperforms the much larger Video-UTR-7B model by 2.1% and 3.8%, respectively, showcasing a remarkable leap in reasoning efficiency. The impact of CDPO’s causal debiasing is even more pronounced on tasks requiring pure causal inference. On CLEVRER, VideoThinker-R1 attains 79.1% accuracy with merely 1k training samples, gaining a 14.2% absolute improvement over the GRPO baseline, demonstrating its ability to learn robust reasoning from limited data. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • We are the first to identify and verify that the “percep-tual shortcut” phenomenon is a critical bottleneck hinder-ing the reasoning development of lightweight MLLMs. From a causal perspective, we provide a formal analysis of the backdoor path connecting the question, reasoning, and answer, pinpointing data bias as its root cause. • We propose the VideoThinker framework, which first trains a “bias model” to embody shortcuts, then employs our CDPO algorithm with a repulsive objective to steer the main model toward genuine reasoning. • VideoThinker-R1 establishes a new state-of-the-art for lightweight MLLMs video reasoning task. Trained with CDPO and only 1% of data for RL, it significantly outperforms both same-scale baselines (e.g., +7% on VideoMME vs. VideoRFT-3B) and much larger models like Video-UTR-7B. 

## 2. Related Works 

2.1. Reinforcement Learning in MLLMs 

Recent advancements in enhancing the reasoning abilities of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have heavily relied on Reinforcement Learning (RL) frame-works. Techniques like GRPO [1], an efficient variant of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), have been widely adopted to fine-tune models for complex visual reasoning tasks [5, 14, 15]. However, the predominant focus of this line of work has been on refining the optimization process itself, such as the learning algorithm [6] or the reward sig-nal [4, 5, 8], while largely overlooking a more fundamen-tal issue: the inherent biases and spurious correlations em-bedded within the training datasets [16–19]. Consequently, even with powerful optimization, models often learn to ex-ploit spurious correlations. For instance, they learn to asso-ciate superficial features with answers rather than develop-ing genuine causal understanding. This leaves a critical gap, as existing methods lack an explicit mechanism to counter-act shortcut learning, limiting their ability to generalize and perform true causal reasoning. 

2.2. Shortcut Learning in MLLMs 

Shortcut learning is a recognized core challenge in MLLMs, primarily manifesting as intermodal bias, where models rely excessively on language priors while neglecting visual ev-idence [20–23]. To resolve this intermodal conflict, causal inference has been widely used for both diagnosis [24, 25] and intervention [26–29]. However, these causal debias-ing strategies are predominantly designed to resolve the in-termodal conflict (i.e., whether to trust text versus vision), operating on the implicit assumption that once the model attends to the correct modality, reasoning will proceed cor-rectly. This assumption is flawed, as it overlooks a dis-tinct failure mode: the intramodal “perceptual shortcut.” While this concept is well-established in traditional image recognition tasks (e.g., relying on image background with-out learning robust features) [30–34], our work is the first to specify and diagnose its more advanced form in MLLMs reasoning. We find models exploit “Observational short-cuts” from the original video, such as merely confirming two objects never touched, to “cheat” on an “Inferential question” that should require complex counterfactual rea-soning. This demonstrates that existing causal solutions are insufficient, as they are unequipped to address the deeper, intramodal “reasoning deficit.” 

## 3. Methodology 

3.1. Preliminary 

We focus on the video reasoning task [14, 35] of multi-choice question-answering (MCQA). When give a query Q

which includes a video input, a question and the candidate answers A, the model fθ is required to predict the correct answer a∗ ∈ A based on both the context, which can be formulated as: 

a∗ = fθ (Q, A). (1) To enhance the complex reasoning abilities of MLLMs re-quired for this task, recent works [4, 6, 8, 36] have moved towards RL to fine-tune large models. Notably, GRPO [1] has been successfully used to achieve state-of-the-art per-formance in math and coding reasoning [37, 38]. GRPO provides an efficient, criticism-free RL framework by op-timizing policy-level group comparisons. It first samples a group of G candidate responses {O1, . . . , O G} and uses the rule-based reward model to generate scores {R1, . . . , R G}.These are then normalized into the relative quality: 

ˆAi = Ri − mean ({ Ri}Gi=1)

std ({ Ri}Gi=1) , (2) where ˆAi as the standardized advantage of the i-th response within the group. The policy πθ is then updated by maxi-mizing the GRPO objective function: 

JGRPO (θ) =E(q,a )∼D,{oi}Gi=1∼πθold (⋅∣q)

[ 1

G

> G

∑

> i=1

1

∣oi∣

> ∣oi∣

∑

> t=1

( min (ri,t (θ) ˆAi,t ,

clip (ri,t (θ), 1 − ε, 1 + ε) ˆAi,t )

− βD KL (πθ ∣∣ πref ))] ,

(3) where 

ri,t (θ) = πθ (oi,t ∣ q, o i, <t)

πθold (oi,t ∣ q, o i, <t) . (4) 1.5-2.0s           

> Problem ：Which of the following will happen if the cube is removed?
> Options ：A. The cylinder collides with the metal sphere ✅B. The purple object and the metal sphere collide ❌
> Annotations (Collision Event in Video) ：
> Collision_ID Frame_ID Object 1 Object 2
> 144 "purple", "rubber", "sphere" "yellow", "rubber", "cylinder"
> 263 "yellow", "rubber", "cylinder" "green", "rubber", "cube"

4.5-5.0s 2.0-2.5s 3.0-3.5s 4.0-4.5s 1.0-1.5s          

> Collision 1 Collision 2 Collision 3
> ⚠Conflict
> 381 "green", "rubber", "cube" "green", "metal", "sphere"
> 👀 Same Figure 3. Illustration of Perceptual Shortcuts in Counterfactual Reasoning Tasks. The video depicts a multi-object collision scenario. Option A (Inferential) requires causal reasoning as removing the cube leads to a conflicting outcome, while Option B (Observational) allows for a “perceptual shortcut” by simply observing the original video.

3.2. Diagnosing the Perceptual Shortcuts 

While GRPO (Eq. 3) has achieved superior success in com-plex reasoning domains like mathematics [37], existing work [7, 8] reveals that its effectiveness on 3B models for video reasoning is surprisingly insignificant. This stark con-trast led us to suspect the data itself. Unlike the logical pu-rity of math, we hypothesize that the video reasoning train-ing set possesses a fundamental limitation that causes this failure. This stark contrast led us to suspect the data itself. Unlike the logical purity of math, we hypothesize that the video reasoning training set possesses a fundamental limi-tation that causes this failure. To formally test this hypothesis, we designed a diagnos-tic experiment. We selected the counterfactual task in the CLEVRER [9] dataset for this diagnosis, as it is a widely-used benchmark for video reasoning training [4]. Crucially, its detailed collision event annotations (as shown in Fig-ure 1) provide the precise, ground-truth information neces-sary to formally categorize its counterfactual questions into two distinct types: Inferential and Observational . As il-lustrated in Figure 3, a truly Inferential question (e.g., Op-tion A) involves a causal blocker. In the video, the “green, rubber, cube” prevents the “yellow, rubber, cylinder” from colliding with the “green, metal, sphere.” To correctly an-swer “if the cube is removed,” the model is forced to per-form step-by-step reasoning to deduce a new event that con-flicts with the original video’s timeline. In contrast, an Ob-servational question (e.g., Option B) can be “cheated.” A model does not need to reason about the cube’s removal; it can simply scan the original video, observe that the “purple, rubber, sphere” and the “green, metal, sphere” never inter-act, and use this superficial visual evidence as a shortcut. This exact mechanism is the “perceptual shortcut” we aim to diagnose. Moreover, this categorization led to a staggering discov-ery: these “easy” pseudo-reasoning Observational shortcuts constitute a massive 74.0% (13674/18473) of the training dataset. We believe this overwhelming imbalance is the pri-mary culprit. We then fine-tuned 3B and 7B models [13] using the GRPO framework on the 1k training samples con-taining both of these question types, with settings group size 

G=8, β=0.05, and learning rate 10 −6.After training, we evaluate it on the CLEVRER valid dataset, consisting of 11524 observational questions and only 1224 inferential questions. The results were striking. As shown in Figure 1, the 3B model’s accuracy on the criti-cal Inferential tasks plummeted from 73.9% to 63.1%, even while its performance on Observational tasks remained sta-ble or increased. This provides concrete evidence for our hypothesis: the RL model, poisoned by the shortcut bias, actively unlearned true reasoning. 

3.3. Causal Analysis of Perceptual Shortcuts 

We start by formalizing the reasoning process through an SCM [39], which explicitly describes the causal relation-ships between key variables involved in VQA: the input query Q, latent thinking T reflecting genuine causal reason-ing, superficial observation O capturing statistical biases, and the answer A. This SCM, illustrated in Figure 5, repre-sents our causal assumptions underlying the VQA process: • Q → O: The input query Q is processed to extract su-perficial, observational evidence, forming the observation variable O. This path represents a shallow form of pattern matching, where the model finds literal events or objects in the video that correspond to the entities in the question, while ignoring complex logical or causal operators. As Step2: Causal Debiasing Policy Optimization Step1: Bias Model Training 

> Rule-based Reward
> Group Computation

👀 🔥     

> Bias Model
> Observational Query
> Q:What will collide without Yellow ？
> Moving
> Observational Query
> Q:What will collide without Yellow ？
> Moving
> Observational Dataset
> Q:What will collide without Yellow ？
> Moving
> The yellow object is stationary and distant from the others, its removal will not influence their interactions .

🤔 Policy Model 🔥 

Output: Output: The red ball and the cyan object    

> appear to be close , so the red ball will collide with the cyan object.

👀 Bias Model  ❄  

> Query Query
> Rule-based Reward
> Group Computation Loss
> Update

（Debias signals ）Figure 4. An overview of our VideoThinker framework designed to mitigate perceptual shortcuts in reasoning. We first train a Bias Model to embody those shortcuts. Then CDPO compels the main policy model to learn robust reasoning by using a repulsive KL-divergence objective. This objective actively pushes the policy away from bias. Query     

> Observe Think Answer
> ✅
> ❌
> （a）Video-QA SCM
> Query
> Observe Think Answer
> ❌
> ⚠
> Causal relationship
> Spurious relationship
> （b）the intervened SCM
> Causal relationship

Figure 5. Our modeling. (a) shows our causal assumption in the format of SCM, specifically proposed for the task of Video-QA. (b) shows our method how to cut the perception shortcut, motivate to genuine reasoning. 

illustrated in Figure 5(a), given the query “What will col-lide without Yellow?”, this pathway simply extracts the entire observed collision sequence (Red → Cyan → Metal in Figure 1), as it provides a direct, superficial answer that sidesteps the counterfactual nature of the query. • Q → T : The query Q is processed to extract information required for genuine reasoning, forming the thinking vari-able T . For the query “What will collide without Cyan?” in the Figure 5(a), this pathway understands that it must simulate an unobserved scenario, leading to the correct inferential chain (Red → Metal in Figure 1). • T → A: The thinking variable T causally determines the final answer A. The full chain Q → T → A constitutes the ideal causal pathway, representing genuine reasoning. • O → A: The observation O can directly influence the answer A. This represents the spurious bias pathway. It is a cognitive shortcut where the model uses the easily extracted observational evidence from O to directly gen-erate an answer. This path is often exploited by models during training due to its statistical efficiency, but it fails on complex problems requiring true understanding. The SCM reveals a critical issue. The input query Q

acts as a confounder [39], creating two parallel information streams. This structure opens a backdoor [39] between the reasoning process T and the answer A via the observation 

O, leading to spurious correlations. These spurious corre-lations are a direct result of data bias: the training set is replete with “easy” instances where the answer A can be correctly predicted from superficial observations O alone, bypassing the need for genuine reasoning T . Consequently, a standard model will inevitably learn to exploit this “path of least resistance,” the bias pathway Q → O → A, which compromises its reasoning ability. Therefore, to ensure the model relies on the intended reasoning path Q → T → A,we must intervene to remove the confounding bias rooted in this data, which motivates us to find a solution to debias. 

3.4. The framework of VideoThinker 

Theoretically, the standard solution from causal inference to eliminate such confounding effects is the backdoor adjust-ment [40, 41]. This procedure requires calculating the true causal effect by marginalizing over the confounding vari-able O, conditioned on the context Q:

P (A∣do (T = t), Q = q) =

∫O

P (A∣T = t, O = o, Q = q)P (O = o∣Q = q)dO, (5) where this is the bias-free, counterfactual answer. How-ever, this ideal intervention is intractable in our setting. This intractability is twofold: (1) The variable O is a high-dimensional, continuous latent representation, making the integration over all its possible states computationally pro-hibitive. (2) The procedure also requires modeling the com-plex conditional prior P (O∣Q), which is itself a challeng-ing generative task. Therefore, to bridge the gap between theory and practice, we propose VideoThinker , a novel and practical framework for causal debiasing. Instead of attempting the intractable marginalization, VideoThinker achieves the goal of closing the back-door path through an efficient, adversarial approximation. 

3.4.1. Bias Aware Training 

The first step in our causal intervention framework is to ex-plicitly isolate and embody the “bad” bias pathway ( Q →O → A). We achieve this by training a dedicated Bias Model, denoted as πbias , designed to become an expert at exploiting statistical shortcuts. To this end, we leverage the richly annotated CLEVRER [9] dataset to construct a spe-cialized bias-promoting dataset, Dbias . We identify obser-vational or shortcut questions within the dataset’s counter-factual tasks. These are instances where the counterfactual condition (e.g., “without the yellow ball”) is irrelevant be-cause the events described in the correct answer choice oc-cur in the original video regardless. Specifically, thanks to the detailed ground-truth collision logs in CLEVRER, we can automatically filter for these samples. For a given ques-tion, if an answer option describes an event that perfectly matches an event in the ground-truth log, we classify this instance as observational and add it to the bias dataset, Dbias .With this curated data, we then aim to accelerate the learning of these shortcut paths. Inspired by DAPO [38], we remove the KL-divergence constraint entirely. This en-courages the policy to converge quickly to the simplest and most biased solution. By optimizing this objective on our curated data, the re-sulting policy πbias becomes a proficient proxy for the unde-sirable bias, setting the stage for our causal intervention. 

3.4.2. Causal Debiasing Policy Optimization 

With the frozen Bias Model πbias serving as an explicit proxy for the “bad” shortcut reasoning, we now train our thinking model, πθ . The objective for this model as follows: 

JCDPO (θ) =E(q,a )∼D,{oi}Gi=1∼πθold (⋅∣q)

[ 1

G

> G

∑

> i=1

1

∣oi∣

> ∣oi∣

∑

> t=1

( min (ri,t (θ) ˆAi,t ,

clip (ri,t (θ), 1 − ε, 1 + ε) ˆAi,t )

+ βD KL (πθ ∣∣ πbias ))] .

(6) This objective function consists of two key components. It drives πθ to maximize the task-specific advantage ˆAi,t on the full dataset D, ensuring the model remains focused on generating correct and high-quality answers. The second term, +βD KL (⋅), is our key intervention mechanism. Since the entire JCDPO (θ) objective is maximized during training, the positive sign before the KL-divergence term means that we are actively training the model to maximize its distri-butional distance from the frozen bias model. This adver-sarial pressure penalizes the thinking model for adopting action distributions similar to the shortcut solutions learned by πbias . It thereby compels the model to explore and con-verge upon alternative, more complex reasoning pathways (Q → T → A) that are inaccessible to the bias Model. In essence, by simultaneously optimizing for task re-ward and divergence from the bias policy, the VideoThinker framework trains a model that is both accurate and causally robust. The hyperparameter β controls the strength of this debiasing regularizer. This entire procedure serves as our practical, gradient-based approximation of the formal back-door adjustment, effectively cutting the spurious pathway. 

## 4. Experiment 

4.1. Implementation Details 

We use Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct [13] as our base model and conduct training on two NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs, each with 48GB VRAM. Training is conducted in two phases: first, the Bias Model is trained for 500 steps on the curated CLEVRER bias dataset. Subsequently, Video-Thinker is trained for 500 steps on the CLEVRER training set, with the debiasing coefficient β defined in Equation 6 is 0.01. During optimization, we employ a soft accuracy reward and a format reward [6]. To expedite training, we sample up to 16 frames per video and resize frames to a res-olution of 128 × 28 × 28 , with G=8 and learning rate 10 −6.For evaluating, we conduct experiments on six stan-dard benchmarks, consistent with previous work [4, 6, 8]: CLEVRER [9], MMVU [47], Video-Holmes [48], MVBench [49], TempCompass [50], and VideoMME [14]. Among them, the first three are video reasoning bench-marks, which focus primarily on assessing the model’s rea-soning capabilities. The latter three are general-purpose video understanding benchmarks, which include a mixture of perception and reasoning tasks. For all evaluations, we use 32 frames, upscale the input resolution to 256 × 28 × 28 ,and set sampling parameters with top p=0.001 and tempera-ture=0.01. The evaluation metric is average accuracy. More details are provided in the supplementary. 

4.2. Comparison with State-of-the-Arts 

As shown in Table 1, our proposed causal intervention framework, VideoThinker, empowers VideoThinker-R1 to achieve comprehensive leadership as a lightweight 3B model, even outperforming several larger 7B-scale open-source models. For instance, on general understand-ing benchmarks like MVBench and TempCompass, our model’s scores of 60.9 and 63.5 surpass those of Video-UTR-7B [46], showcasing the exceptional performance achievable with our efficient approach. Specifically, on the CLEVRER benchmark, VideoThinker-R1 achieves a score of 79.1%, outperforming GRPO by a significant margin of 14.2% under identical training conditions. This highlights that the performance leap is driven not by data differences but by VideoThinker’s ability to counteract shortcut learn-ing. Furthermore, the improved generalization fostered by VideoThinker is evident when compared to other contem-Table 1. Comparison of model performance on both video reasoning and general video understanding benchmarks. Following previous works, we restrict evaluation on MMVU mc to multiple-choice questions and exclude subtitles from VideoMME wo _sub . For CLEVRER cf ,to mitigate type bias, we specifically select the single-choice counterfactual task for evaluation. 

Models Training Video Reasoning Video Understanding 

CLEVRER cf MMVU mc VideoHolmes MVBench TempCompass VideoMME wo _sub 

• Open-Source Models 

LLaMA-VID [42] - - - - 41.9 45.6 -VideoLLaMA2 [43] - - 44.8 - 54.6 - 47.9 LongVA-7B [44] - - - - - 56.9 52.6 VILA-1.5-8B [45] - - - - - 58.8 -Video-UTR-7B [46] - - - - 58.8 59.7 52.6 Qwen2.5-VL-3B (CoT) [13] - 44.7 52.8 32.5 49.6 30.0 52.0 

• Concurrent R1-based 3B Models 

TinyLLaVA-Video-R1 [7] 5.5K SFT&RL - 46.9 - - 49.5 46.6 VideoRFT [8] 110K SFT&RL 59.3 55.1 33.0 59.5 61.0 45.4 Qwen2.5-VL-GRPO [1] 1K RL 64.9 52.0 32.3 54.9 41.4 50.3 

VideoThinker-R1 1K RL 79.1 56.8 34.3 60.9 63.5 52.4 

Table 2. Ablation study on VideoThinker Framework 

Setting CLEVRER cf MMVU mc 

•Reference Model in VideoThinker 

GRPO (Baseline) 64.9 52.0 VideoThinker-R1 (w/ Qwen2.5VL-3B) 63.3 53.3 VideoThinker-R1 (w/ VideoRFT-3B) 75.4 53.1 VideoThinker-R1 (w/ Bias Model) 79.1 56.8 

•Debiasing Mechanism in VideoThinker 

KL-Minimization ( −β) 74.3 52.6 KL-Maximization ( +β) 79.1 56.8 

•Sensitivity Analysis on β

0.1 62.2 58.4 

0.01 79.1 56.8 0.001 72.8 55.5 

porary 3B models like VideoRFT-3B [8] and TinyLLaVA-Video-R1 [7]. Our model demonstrates holistic improve-ments, leading on MVBench and TempCompass, with an even more pronounced advantage on VideoMME where it surpasses VideoRFT-3B by 7.0%. These results across di-verse tasks validate that VideoThinker provides an effective framework for enhancing the general reasoning abilities. 

4.3. Ablation Study 

4.3.1. Choice of Bias Model 

A core premise of VideoThinker is that effective debias-ing requires a reference model that accurately represents the spurious pathway. We first establish baseline perfor-mances under the GRPO framework, which uses a model’s own initial policy as a reference to constrain fine-tuning. Subsequently, we evaluate the effect of using different ex-ternal models as the “repulsive target” for VideoThinker. As shown in Table 2, within the VideoThinker framework, employing the purpose-built Bias Model, a model specifi-cally designed to embody shortcut behaviors, as the repul-sive target yields the best performance, surging to 79.1% on CLEVRER cf and 56.8% on MMVU mc . This result sig-VideoRFT VideoThinker-R1 GRPO 

Figure 6. Performance of our method training on other datasets. 

nificantly outperforms variants that repel a best model (like VideoRFT-3B) or self-repulsion (which leads to policy col-lapse). This provides strong evidence for our premise. 

4.3.2. The Repulsive Debiasing Mechanism 

Next, we validate the directionality of our intervention: pushing away from (KL-Maximization) or pulling towards (KL-Minimization) the Bias Model’s policy. Table 2 shows KL-Minimization (attraction) fails to generalize, yielding no improvement on MMVU. In contrast, our proposed KL-Maximization (repulsion) achieves superior results, con-firming that robust reasoning emerges not from imitating flawed patterns, but from being explicitly repelled by them. Having confirmed repulsion, we analyze the sensitivity of its strength, β (Table 2). The results reveal a nuanced trade-off. Performance on the in-domain CLEVRER benchmark is sensitive to β. This is expected, as an overly large β (e.g., 0.1) can over-penalize, forcing the model to unlearn useful foundational knowledge (like collision logic) along with the shortcuts. In sharp contrast, performance on the general-purpose MMVU benchmark is highly robust, showing lit-tle variation. This indicates that the generalizable reason-ing capability learned by our model is stable and insensi-tive to β within this range. As β = 0.01 achieves the peak 🧐 VideoThinker-R1: <answer>B</answer> ✅                           

> I see the scene with ... The brown sphere seems to
> play a crucial role in several interactions...
> Q : Without the brown sphere, what will not happen? A.The red one and the rubber sphere collide ❌B.The red object and the metal cube collide ✅
> 😵‍💫 Qwen2.5-VL-3B-GRPO: <answer>A</answer> ❌
> ...The red cylinder and the metal cube would not collide , so this is the correct answer...
> 🧐 VideoThinker-R1: 0✅
> 😵‍💫 Qwen2.5-VL-3B-GRPO: 4❌
> 😵‍💫 VideoRFT-3B: 4❌
> Q : How many rounds ended in a tie? Q : Compare the kinetic energies of the two disks.
> r1=6in, r2=3in
> rpm=120/min
> 🧐 VideoThinker-R1: Not enough information ✅
> 😵‍💫 Qwen2.5-VL-3B-GRPO: Left has 4x ❌
> 😵‍💫 VideoRFT-3B: Left has 4x ❌

Figure 7. Qualitative examples of VideoThinker-R1’s reasoning performance. ( Top ) For a complex reasoning from the CLEVRER dataset, we visualize the detailed reasoning path generated by the model to reach the correct answer. ( Bottom ) For two different queries from the MMVU dataset, we display the model’s correct final answers. Table 3. Performance comparison at the 7B parameter scale 

Models MVBench TempCompass Video-R1-7B [4] 63.8 73.2 VideoRFT-7B [8] 62.1 73.7 

VideoThinker-R1-7B 65.0 73.7 

CLEVRER score while preserving this strong generaliza-tion, we adopt it for all main experiments. 

4.3.3. Robustness to Train Data 

Moreover, we assess whether VideoThinker’s effectiveness is limited to datasets rich in counterfactual queries. To this end, we conduct experiments on other training dataset [51], which only has 1.9% inferential problems. As shown in Figure 6, our VideoThinker-R1 achieves an average accu-racy of 52.3%, surpassing the GRPO baseline (50.3%) and the stronger VideoRFT-3B (50.8%). This result is particu-larly compelling because it shows that VideoThinker is not merely overfitting to a specific problem type. Instead, our framework enhances the model’s fundamental reasoning by teaching it to isolate and suppress spurious signals, a skill that is effective even when counterfactual queries are sparse. 

4.3.4. Scaling to 7B params 

Finally, we extend our evaluation to the 7B scale to assess the framework’s scalability (Table 3). While achieving re-sults comparable to SOTA 7B models [4, 8], the gains are more direct on the 3B model. This is because the “percep-tual shortcut” issue is primarily a deficit of limited-capacity models. Since larger models are inherently more robust against learning bias (Figure 1), our method is particularly critical for enabling compact models to overcome these bot-tlenecks and achieve robust reasoning. 

4.4. Qualitative Analysis 

To qualitatively illustrate how VideoThinker mitigates shortcut learning, we analyze several reasoning tasks from the CLEVRER and MMVU datasets. As shown in Fig-ure 7, the baseline model exhibits a reliance on cognitive shortcuts. For instance, in the MMVU game scenarios, the model often defaults to an incorrect decision based on the superficial visual cue of “identical scores,” bypassing a nec-essary comprehension of the game’s rules. This tendency is more pronounced in the CLEVRER dataset. Here, the baseline model generates a plausible-seeming textual ratio-nale, yet provides a final answer that directly conflicts with this statement. This validates our core hypothesis that the baseline model does not perform genuine logical reasoning. Instead, it over-relies on surface-level cues, resulting in a fractured logical chain. Conversely, VideoThinker-R1 effectively overcomes this limitation. In the CLEVRER task, the model correctly iden-tifies the “brown sphere” as the critical object through logi-cal analysis, leading to a correct final decision and demon-strating a complete and coherent reasoning process. Sim-ilarly, in the MMVU task, VideoThinker-R1 is not mis-led by superficial information like “identical scores” and instead renders a judgment grounded in the game’s rules. When faced with an ambiguous turntable momentum prob-lem with incomplete information, the model correctly con-cludes that the question is unanswerable given the exist-ing data. These examples demonstrate that our proposed method effectively suppresses the model’s reliance on spu-rious features and enforces the desired logical reasoning. 

## 5. Conclusions 

In this work, we diagnosed perceptual bias as a key factor limiting the reasoning abilities of lightweight MLLMs and proposed VideoThinker to counteract it. Our framework trains a “bias model” to master “perceptual shortcuts” and then employs an innovative repulsive objective that forces our primary model to discover genuine reasoning pathways. Experimental results across six benchmarks validate the ef-fectiveness of our approach. We hope this work provides a foundation for building more generalized MLLMs. Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.62506393, the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Founda-tion under Grant No.2026A1515011438, and the Post-doctoral Fellowship Program and the China Postdoc-toral Science Foundation under Grant No.GZC20252314. 

## References 

[1] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathe-matical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. 1, 3, 7 [2] Wenyi Xiao and Leilei Gan. Fast-slow thinking GRPO for large vision-language model reasoning. In NeurIPS , 2025. 1 [3] Ye Wang, Ziheng Wang, Boshen Xu, Yang Du, Kejun Lin, Zihan Xiao, Zihao Yue, Jianzhong Ju, Liang Zhang, Dingyi Yang, Xiangnan Fang, Zewen He, Zhenbo Luo, Wenxuan Wang, Junqi Lin, Jian Luan, and Qin Jin. Time-r1: Post-training large vision language model for temporal video grounding. In NeurIPS , 2025. [4] Kaituo Feng, Kaixiong Gong, Bohao Li, Zonghao Guo, Yibing Wang, Tianshuo Peng, Junfei Wu, Xiaoying Zhang, Benyou Wang, and Xiangyu Yue. Video-r1: Reinforcing video reasoning in MLLMs. In NeurIPS , 2025. 3, 4, 6, 8, 1 [5] Xinhao Li, Ziang Yan, Desen Meng, Lu Dong, Xiangyu Zeng, Yinan He, Yali Wang, Yu Qiao, Yi Wang, and Limin Wang. Videochat-r1: Enhancing spatio-temporal perception via reinforcement fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06958 , 2025. 3, 1 [6] Jisheng Dang, Jingze Wu, Teng Wang, Xuanhui Lin, Nan-nan Zhu, Hongbo Chen, Wei-Shi Zheng, Meng Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Reinforcing video reasoning with focused thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24718 , 2025. 1, 3, 6, 2 [7] Xingjian Zhang, Siwei Wen, Wenjun Wu, and Lei Huang. Tinyllava-video-r1: Towards smaller lmms for video reason-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09641 , 2025. 1, 4, 7 [8] Qi Wang, Yanrui Yu, Ye Yuan, Rui Mao, and Tianfei Zhou. VideoRFT: Incentivizing video reasoning capability in MLLMs via reinforced fine-tuning. In NeurIPS , 2025. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 2 [9] Kexin Yi, Chuang Gan, Yunzhu Li, Pushmeet Kohli, Jiajun Wu, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Clevrer: Collision events for video representation and reasoning. In 

ICLR , 2020. 2, 4, 6, 1 [10] Xuweiyi Chen, Ziqiao Ma, Xuejun Zhang, Sihan Xu, Shengyi Qian, Jianing Yang, David Fouhey, and Joyce Chai. Multi-object hallucination in vision language models. In 

NeurIPS , volume 37, pages 44393–44418, 2024. 2 [11] Mustafa Shukor, Alexandre Rame, Corentin Dancette, and Matthieu Cord. Beyond task performance: evaluating and re-ducing the flaws of large multimodal models with in-context-learning. In ICLR , 2024. [12] Zhongxing Xu, Chengzhi Liu, Qingyue Wei, Juncheng Wu, James Zou, Xin Eric Wang, Yuyin Zhou, and Sheng Liu. More thinking, less seeing? assessing amplified hallucina-tion in multimodal reasoning models. In NeurIPS , 2025. 2 [13] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. 2, 4, 6, 7 [14] Chaoyou Fu, Yuhan Dai, Yongdong Luo, Lei Li, Shuhuai Ren, Renrui Zhang, Zihan Wang, Chenyu Zhou, Yunhang Shen, Mengdan Zhang, et al. Video-mme: The first-ever comprehensive evaluation benchmark of multi-modal llms in video analysis. In CVPR , pages 24108–24118, 2025. 3, 6, 1, 2[15] Yufei Zhan, Yousong Zhu, Shurong Zheng, Hongyin Zhao, Fan Yang, Ming Tang, and Jinqiao Wang. Vision-r1: Evolv-ing human-free alignment in large vision-language models via vision-guided reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18013 , 2025. 3 [16] Antonio Torralba and Alexei A Efros. Unbiased look at dataset bias. In CVPR , pages 1521–1528, 2011. 3 [17] Quan Zhang, Jianhuang Lai, Zhanxiang Feng, and Xiao-hua Xie. Seeing like a human: Asynchronous learning with dynamic progressive refinement for person re-identification. 

IEEE TIP , 31:352–365, 2021. [18] Quan Zhang, Jianhuang Lai, Xiaohua Xie, Xiaofeng Jin, and Sien Huang. Separable spatial-temporal residual graph for cloth-changing group re-identification. IEEE TPAMI ,46(8):5791–5805, 2024. [19] Zefeng Zhang, Hengzhu Tang, Jiawei Sheng, Zhenyu Zhang, Yiming Ren, Zhenyang Li, Dawei Yin, Duohe Ma, and Tingwen Liu. Debiasing multimodal large language mod-els via noise-aware preference optimization. In CVPR , pages 9423–9433, 2025. 3 [20] Qingyi Si, Fandong Meng, Mingyu Zheng, Zheng Lin, Yuanxin Liu, Peng Fu, Yanan Cao, Weiping Wang, and Jie Zhou. Language prior is not the only shortcut: A bench-mark for shortcut learning in vqa. In EMNLP Findings , pages 3698–3712, 2022. 3 [21] Chuanqi Zang, Hanqing Wang, Mingtao Pei, and Wei Liang. Discovering the real association: Multimodal causal reason-ing in video question answering. In CVPR , pages 19027– 19036, June 2023. [22] Guanyu Zhou, Yibo Yan, Xin Zou, Kun Wang, Aiwei Liu, and Xuming Hu. Mitigating modality prior-induced halluci-nations in multimodal large language models via deciphering attention causality. In ICLR , 2025. [23] Jean Park, Kuk Jin Jang, Basam Alasaly, Sriharsha Mopi-devi, Andrew Zolensky, Eric Eaton, Insup Lee, and Kevin Johnson. Assessing modality bias in video question answer-ing benchmarks with multimodal large language models. In 

AAAI , volume 39, pages 19821–19829, 2025. 3 [24] Yulei Niu, Kaihua Tang, Hanwang Zhang, Zhiwu Lu, Xian-Sheng Hua, and Ji-Rong Wen. Counterfactual vqa: A cause-effect look at language bias. In CVPR , pages 12700–12710, 2021. 3 [25] Meiqi Chen, Yixin Cao, Yan Zhang, and Chaochao Lu. Quantifying and mitigating unimodal biases in multimodal large language models: A causal perspective. In EMNLP Findings , pages 16449–16469, 2024. 3 [26] Hung-Ting Su, Yulei Niu, Xudong Lin, Winston H Hsu, and Shih-Fu Chang. Language models are causal knowledge ex-tractors for zero-shot video question answering. In CVPR ,pages 4950–4959, 2023. 3 [27] Yan Tai, Weichen Fan, Zhao Zhang, and Ziwei Liu. Link-context learning for multimodal llms. In CVPR , pages 27176–27185, 2024. [28] Shitian Zhao, Zhuowan Li, Yadong Lu, Alan Yuille, and Yan Wang. Causal-cog: A causal-effect look at context genera-tion for boosting multi-modal language models. In CVPR ,pages 13342–13351, 2024. [29] Weixing Chen, Yang Liu, Binglin Chen, Jiandong Su, Yongsen Zheng, and Liang Lin. Cross-modal causal relation alignment for video question grounding. In CVPR , pages 24087–24096, 2025. 3 [30] Wei Qin, Hanwang Zhang, Richang Hong, Ee-Peng Lim, and Qianru Sun. Causal interventional training for image recog-nition. IEEE TMM , 25:1033–1044, 2021. 3 [31] Xingxuan Zhang, Peng Cui, Renzhe Xu, Linjun Zhou, Yue He, and Zheyan Shen. Deep stable learning for out-of-distribution generalization. In CVPR , pages 5372–5382, 2021. [32] Quan Zhang, Jianhuang Lai, and Xiaohua Xie. Learning modal-invariant angular metric by cyclic projection network for vis-nir person re-identification. IEEE TIP , 30:8019– 8033, 2021. [33] Quan Zhang, Jianhuang Lai, Junyong Zhu, and Xiaohua Xie. Wavelet-guided promotion-suppression transformer for surface-defect detection. IEEE TIP , 32:4517–4528, 2023. [34] Quan Zhang, Lei Wang, Vishal M Patel, Xiaohua Xie, and Jianhaung Lai. View-decoupled transformer for person re-identification under aerial-ground camera network. In CVPR ,pages 22000–22009, 2024. 3 [35] Kairui Hu, Penghao Wu, Fanyi Pu, Wang Xiao, Yuanhan Zhang, Xiang Yue, Bo Li, and Ziwei Liu. Video-mmmu: Evaluating knowledge acquisition from multi-discipline pro-fessional videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13826 , 2025. 3 [36] KunChang Li, Yinan He, Yi Wang, Yizhuo Li, Wenhai Wang, Ping Luo, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao. Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06355 , 2023. 3 [37] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633– 638, 2025. 3, 4 [38] Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xi-aochen Zuo, YuYue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, Juncai Liu, LingJun Liu, Xin Liu, Haibin Lin, Zhiqi Lin, Bole Ma, Guangming Sheng, Yuxuan Tong, Chi Zhang, Mofan Zhang, Ru Zhang, Wang Zhang, Hang Zhu, Jinhua Zhu, Jiaze Chen, Jiangjie Chen, Chengyi Wang, Hongli Yu, Yuxuan Song, Xiangpeng Wei, Hao Zhou, Jingjing Liu, Wei-Ying Ma, Ya-Qin Zhang, Lin Yan, Yonghui Wu, and Mingx-uan Wang. DAPO: An open-source LLM reinforcement learning system at scale. In NeurIPS , 2025. 3, 6, 1 [39] Judea Pearl. Causal inference in statistics: An overview. 2009. 4, 5 [40] Judea Pearl. [bayesian analysis in expert systems]: Com-ment: Graphical models, causality and intervention. Statisti-cal Science , 8(3):266–269, 1993. 5 [41] Sander Greenland, Judea Pearl, and James M Robins. Causal diagrams for epidemiologic research. Epidemiology ,10(1):37–48, 1999. 5 [42] Yanwei Li, Chengyao Wang, and Jiaya Jia. Llama-vid: An image is worth 2 tokens in large language models. In ECCV ,pages 323–340. Springer, 2024. 7 [43] Zesen Cheng, Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Yifei Xin, Xin Li, Guanzheng Chen, Yongxin Zhu, Wenqi Zhang, Ziyang Luo, Deli Zhao, et al. Videollama 2: Advancing spatial-temporal modeling and audio understanding in video-llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07476 , 2024. 7 [44] Peiyuan Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Bo Li, Guangtao Zeng, Jingkang Yang, Yuanhan Zhang, Ziyue Wang, Haoran Tan, Chunyuan Li, and Ziwei Liu. Long context transfer from language to vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16852 , 2024. 7[45] Ji Lin, Hongxu Yin, Wei Ping, Pavlo Molchanov, Moham-mad Shoeybi, and Song Han. Vila: On pre-training for visual language models. In CVPR , pages 26689–26699, 2024. 7 [46] En Yu, Kangheng Lin, Liang Zhao, Yana Wei, Zining Zhu, Haoran Wei, Jianjian Sun, Zheng Ge, Xiangyu Zhang, Jingyu Wang, et al. Unhackable temporal rewarding for scal-able video mllms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12081 , 2025. 6, 7 [47] Yilun Zhao, Haowei Zhang, Lujing Xie, Tongyan Hu, Guo Gan, Yitao Long, Zhiyuan Hu, Weiyuan Chen, Chuhan Li, Zhijian Xu, et al. Mmvu: Measuring expert-level multi-discipline video understanding. In CVPR , pages 8475–8489, 2025. 6, 1, 2 [48] Junhao Cheng, Yuying Ge, Teng Wang, Yixiao Ge, Jing Liao, and Ying Shan. Video-holmes: Can mllm think like holmes for complex video reasoning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21374 , 2025. 6, 1 [49] Kunchang Li, Yali Wang, Yinan He, Yizhuo Li, Yi Wang, Yi Liu, Zun Wang, Jilan Xu, Guo Chen, Ping Luo, et al. Mvbench: A comprehensive multi-modal video understand-ing benchmark. In CVPR , pages 22195–22206, 2024. 6, 1 [50] Yuanxin Liu, Shicheng Li, Yi Liu, Yuxiang Wang, Shuhuai Ren, Lei Li, Sishuo Chen, Xu Sun, and Lu Hou. Temp-compass: Do video llms really understand videos? In ACL Findings , pages 8731–8772, 2024. 6, 1 [51] Viorica Patraucean, Lucas Smaira, Ankush Gupta, Adria Re-casens Continente, Larisa Markeeva, Dylan Sunil Banarse, Skanda Koppula, Joseph Heyward, Mateusz Malinowski, Yi Yang, Carl Doersch, Tatiana Matejovicova, Yury Sul-sky, Antoine Miech, Alexandre Fréchette, Hanna Klimczak, Raphael Koster, Junlin Zhang, Stephanie Winkler, Yusuf Ay-tar, Simon Osindero, Dima Damen, Andrew Zisserman, and Joao Carreira. Perception test: A diagnostic benchmark for multimodal video models. In NeurIPS , 2023. 8 Beyond Perceptual Shortcuts: Causal-Inspired Debiasing Optimization for Generalizable Video Reasoning in Lightweight MLLMs 

# Supplementary Material 

In this document, we provide additional details on the implementation and benchmarks to complement the main paper. Further experiments are also incorporated. And we provided all the code in the supplement, including the JSON files for bias and VideoThinker-R1 training. Specifically, we introduce the details of the training setting in Sec. A. And in Sec. B, we illustrate how to filter the inferential and observational data, including the algorithm and sam-ples, and the details of the setups. Finally, the discussion of the limitations is provided in Sec. C. 

## A. Detailed Experimental Setup 

A.1. Training Setup 

Prompt. For training, we use the simple prompting strat-egy like TW-GRPO [6], the prompt is: “Output the thinking process in <think >< /think > and the final answer (letters separated by commas, if multiple) in <answer >< /answer >

tags." 

Reward. VideoThinker-R1 uses two types of rewards: • Format Reward. Similar to other existing MLLM-R1 [4, 5], we introduce format rewards to ensure the model outputs responses in the desired format. For exam-ple, we expect the model to enclose its thought process within <think>...</think> and the answer within 

<answer>...</answer> . We design a format re-ward Rformat for each task and use regular expression matching to determine whether the model adheres to the specified format. • Multi-Level Soft Reward. To address the high reward variance in complex reasoning tasks with multiple cor-rect answers, we choose a soft reward [6] to provide a more granular learning signal. This reward is designed to assign partial credit for incomplete yet correct predictions while strictly penalizing any false positives. Specifically, the reward Rsof t is calculated as the ratio of correctly predicted items to the total ground truth items ( ∣P ∣/∣ G∣)if and only if the predicted set P is a subset of the ground truth set G. If any prediction is outside the ground truth set, the reward is zero, thus promoting precision. This fine-grained feedback on accuracy leads to more stable gradient estimation and policy optimization. 

Bias Model Training. The first step in our VideoThinker framework is to create a specialized Bias Model ( πbias ) that explicitly learns and embodies the “perceptual shortcut" be-havior. To construct its training data, we begin with the counterfactual subset of the CLEVRER [9] dataset. Us-ing the filtering method detailed in Section B.3, we curate a set of 12,191 (out of 18,473) “perceptual" samples, where the correct answer can be directly observed from the video. Crucially, to compel the model to adopt a shortcut, we pro-grammatically simplify these questions into purely observa-tional tasks by removing the counterfactual condition. For instance, the question “Which event will happen if the cylin-der is removed?" is transformed into the simpler “Which event will happen?" . This modification forces the model to ignore the reasoning premise and instead learn a policy that describes only visual events, thereby intentionally instilling the desired perceptual bias. To train the bias model, we randomly selected 500 sam-ples from this curated dataset and fine-tuned the base model for 500 steps. We employed the GRPO [1] but deliber-ately removed its KL-divergence constraint to accelerate the model’s convergence to the biased policy [38]. Other train-ing parameters, such as a learning rate of 10 −6, follow es-tablished work. On a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU with 48GB VRAM, this fine-tuning process takes approxi-mately 4.5 hours to complete. 

VideoThinker-R1 Training. With the frozen Bias Model (πbias ), we proceed to fine-tune our primary reasoning model, VideoThinker-R1. For this stage, we randomly sam-ple 1,000 examples from the original CLEVRER [9] coun-terfactual training set. The model is trained for 500 steps using CDPO, as defined in Equation 6. In this objective, the crucial hyperparameter β, which controls the strength of the repulsive force against the bias model, is set to 0.001. On two NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs with 48GB VRAM, this fine-tuning process takes approximately 6 hours to com-plete. 

A.2. Evaluating Setup 

Our model’s performance is assessed across six diverse video benchmarks, which we categorize into two groups to ensure a comprehensive evaluation. The first group, focused on general video understanding, includes MVBench [49], TempCompass [50], and VideoMME [14]. These bench-marks primarily test core visual perception and temporal comprehension abilities. The second group is designed to evaluate complex reasoning, featuring CLEVRER [9], Video-Holmes [48], and MMVU [47]. These datasets as-sess sophisticated spatiotemporal and multimodal reasoning over dynamic video content. For all evaluations, we follow the experimental setup used in Video-RFT [8], using identical prompts, sampling temperature (0.01), top_p (0.001), and batch size to ensure consistency. For CLEVRER [9], following the work [6], we evaluate exclusively on its most challenging counterfactual subset. To maintain a fair comparison with models that do not support a multiple-answer format, we adopt a single-answer evaluation subset. For other benchmarks, we align with the setup in Video-RFT [8], conducting experiments on excluding subtitles from VideoMME [14] and the multiple-choice split of MMVU [47]. 

## B. Details of Diagnostic Experiment 

To better understand the root causes of performance degra-dation in smaller models fine-tuned under perceptual biases, we constructed a diagnostic experiment that disentangles two qualitatively different reasoning types: observational 

and inferential . This diagnostic task was motivated by the observation that perceptual shortcuts, heuristics that ex-ploit surface-level correlations in visual outputs, often suf-fice for solving a subset of questions, while failing for oth-ers that require causal or counterfactual inference. To con-cretely illustrate this distinction, we curated visual question-answering datasets from the CLEVRER benchmark [9] and manually annotated questions into two categories: • Observational questions , where a model succeeds by de-tecting and describing what visibly occurred in the video. • Inferential questions , where solving the task requires reasoning about hypothetical interventions. In the following sections, we present detailed examples from each category to clarify their defining characteristics and implications for model behavior. We also provide a for-mal description of our problem filtering strategy, which em-ploys a rule-based classification algorithm to automatically distinguish between observational and inferential questions, thereby enabling large-scale analysis of capability conflicts under different fine-tuning regimes. 

B.1. Examples of the Observational Problem 

Observational questions are characterized by the fact that the correct answer can be derived directly from what is vi-sually present in the video. Figure A1 presents a repre-sentative example of an observational question from the CLEVRER dataset. In this case, the question asks what event will not happen if the rubber object is removed. Among the candidate options, “the sphere and the blue cylinder collide" corresponds to a visible event in the orig-inal video, and this event remains unaffected by the hypo-thetical removal. The annotations confirm that this collision occurs regardless of the intervention. Solving such ques-tions does not require reasoning about alternative outcomes or hypothetical changes. Instead, perceptual matching be-tween the video content and the answer options is sufficient. 

B.2. Examples of the Inferential Problem 

Figure A2 illustrates a representative example of an infer-ential question from the CLEVRER dataset. The question asks what event would occur if a specific object, the green cube, were removed. In this case, answering correctly re-quires reasoning beyond the directly observable sequence. The correct answer involves predicting a new collision that is not present in the original annotated video, namely the in-teraction between the yellow cylinder and the metal sphere. This type of question cannot be resolved through direct observation alone. In the original video, the green cube initiates a chain of interactions, and its removal would al-ter the subsequent trajectory of the remaining objects. As such, solving the question demands counterfactual reason-ing about how the physical system would evolve under a hy-pothetical intervention. This makes the problem fundamen-tally different from observational tasks and places greater demands on the model’s causal understanding. 

B.3. Problem Filtering Strategy Explanation 

To determine whether a visual reasoning question is obser-vational or interventional , we employ a rule-based clas-sification algorithm, detailed in Algorithm 1, to distin-guish whether a given visual reasoning question is obser-vational or interventional . The procedure takes as input a natural language problem and a candidate option ,and proceeds in four main stages. First, the system ex-tracts the core physical event from the option using the 

ExtractBaseEvent function. This typically corre-sponds to an interaction predicate such as “the sphere and the cube collide.” Second, the problem text is exam-ined for linguistic negation (e.g., “not,” “never”) using the 

ContainsNegation function. If negation is detected, the base event is logically inverted via the NegateEvent 

function (e.g., “do not collide”); otherwise, the base event remains unchanged. Third, the system queries the target event—either the base event or its negation—against struc-tured video annotations using SearchInAnnotations .If the event is found in the annotated data, the option is con-sidered grounded in actual observations and the problem is classified as observational . Otherwise, the event must be inferred under a hypothetical intervention (e.g., object re-moval), and the problem is labeled interventional .To illustrate, consider the problem: “If the rubber object is removed, what will not happen?” with the option “The sphere and the cube collide.” Because the question is neg-ative, the event is negated to “The sphere and the cube do not collide,” and this negated event is searched for in the annotations. If it is not found, the problem requires reason-ing about a counterfactual scenario and is thus classified as 4.0-4.5s 1.0-1.5s 1.5-2.0s 3.0-3.5s 0.5-1.0s             

> Collision 1
> 👀 Same
> Problem ：If the rubber object is removed, what will not happen?
> Options ：A. The sphere and the cube collide ❌B. The sphere and the blue cylinder collide ✅
> Annotations (Collision Event in Video) ：
> Collision_ID Frame_ID Object 1 Object 2
> 131 "blue", "metal", "sphere" "red", "metal", "cube"
> 250 "red", "metal", "cube" "blue", "metal", "cylinder"
> Collision 2
> 👀 Same Figure A1. The example of the Observational Problem in CLEVRER.

1.5-2.0s           

> Problem ：Which of the following will happen if the cube is removed?
> Options ：A. The cylinder collides with the metal sphere ✅B. The purple object and the metal sphere collide ❌
> Annotations (Collision Event in Video) ：
> Collision_ID Frame_ID Object 1 Object 2
> 144 "purple", "rubber", "sphere" "yellow", "rubber", "cylinder"
> 263 "yellow", "rubber", "cylinder" "green", "rubber", "cube"

4.5-5.0s 2.0-2.5s 3.0-3.5s 4.0-4.5s 1.0-1.5s        

> Collision 1 Collision 2 Collision 3
> ⚠Conflict
> 381 "green", "rubber", "cube" "green", "metal", "sphere"
> 👀 Same
> Figure A2. The example of the Inferential Problem in CLEVRER.

interventional. In contrast, for the problem “Which of the following will happen if the cube is removed?” and the op-tion “The cylinder collides with the metal sphere,” the base event is used directly. If it is present in the annotations, the problem is classified as observational. This pipeline en-sures that natural language cues, video-grounded evidence, and causal structure are systematically integrated to support robust problem categorization. 

B.4. Diagnostic Experimental Setup 

We adopt the same evaluation setup as described in Sec-tion A.2. To eliminate the potential influence of unfamiliar answer formats on baseline model performance, we restrict our evaluation to the single-answer questions within the counterfactual subset of CLEVRER. This avoids degrada-tion caused by exposure mismatches with multiple-answer formats. Our implementation follows Video-RFT [8], using identical prompts, a sampling temperature of 0.1, top_p of 0.001, and a batch size of 64. For each video, we sample 32 frames and upscale them to a resolution of 256 × 28 × 28 .The full counterfactual subset contains 9,238 questions, among which 3,945 are single-answer. To obtain fine-grained accuracy estimates, especially for inferential gener-alization, we evaluate model predictions at the option level 

rather than only at the question level. This is necessary because some inferential questions include distractor op-tions that are observational in nature (e.g., option B in Fig-ure A2). We therefore compute accuracy separately over in-dividual options, resulting in a total of 11,524 observational options and 1,224 inferential options. This setup enables a Algorithm 1 Data Filtering Strategy  

> 1:

Input: problem , option  

> 2:

Output: “Observational" or “Interference"  

> 3:

{Step 1: Extract the base event}  

> 4:

baseEvent ← ExtractBaseEvent(option)  

> 5:

{Step 2: Determine if the problem contains negation}  

> 6:

if problem contains negation then  

> 7:

eventToQuery ← NegateEvent(baseEvent)  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

eventToQuery ← baseEvent  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

{Step 3: Search the event in annotations}  

> 12:

found ← SearchInAnnotations(eventToQuery)  

> 13:

{Step 4: Classify based on search result}  

> 14:

if found is true then  

> 15:

return “Observational"  

> 16:

else  

> 17:

return “Inferential"  

> 18:

end if 

more precise measurement of the model’s reasoning degra-dation and perceptual bias under fine-tuning. 

## C. Discussion 

C.1. Limitations 

Despite its promising results, our work has several limita-tions that offer avenues for future research. First, the ef-fectiveness of VideoThinker is primarily validated on VQA tasks that align well with our underlying causal assump-tions; its generalization to less structured tasks like video captioning remains an open question. Furthermore, our framework employs a practical, gradient-based approxima-tion (CDPO) of a causal intervention, prioritizing compu-tational efficiency over theoretical exactness. Finally, our analysis is centered on a 3B lightweight model where the fine-tuning degradation was most pronounced, and a more comprehensive study is needed to understand how percep-tual bias and our intervention scale with larger models.