Title: Deep learning based Non-Rigid Volume-to-Surface Registration for Brain Shift compensation Using Point Cloud

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17389v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:41:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
# Deep learning based Non-Rigid Volume-to-Surface Registration for Brain Shift compensation Using Point Cloud 

Eashrat Jahan Muniya a,b , Gernot Kronreif a, Ander Biguri c, Wolfgang Birkfellner b, Sepideh Hatamikia d,a,b, ∗

> a

Austrian Center for Medical Innovation and Technology, Wiener Neustadt, Austria  

> b

Medical University of Vienna, Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering Vienna, Austria 

> c

University of Cambridge, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics (DAMTP) Cambridge, United Kingdom 

> d

Danube Private University (DPU), Department of Medicine Krems, Austria 

Abstract 

Soft-tissue deformation remains a major limitation of image-guided neu-rosurgery, where intra-operative anatomy can deviate substantially from pre-operative imaging due to brain shift, compromising navigation accuracy and surgical safety. Existing compensation methods often rely on intra-operative MRI, CT or ultrasound, which are disruptive and difficult to integrate re-peatedly into the surgical workflow. In neurosurgical procedures, a partial 3D surface can be reconstructed as a point cloud from information captured by stereoscopic microscopes or laser range scanners (LRS) acquired from dif-ferent viewing angles, which are derived from the visual access to a limited portion of the exposed cortex. This makes point cloud registration a mean-ingful approach in this setting without interrupting surgery. However, such partial and noisy surface observations make deformation estimation particu-larly challenging. In this study, we propose a novel deep learning–based framework for 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

Email addresses: eashrat.muniya@acmit.at (Eashrat Jahan Muniya), 

gernot.kronreif@acmit.at (Gernot Kronreif), ab2860@cam.ac.uk (Ander Biguri), 

wolfgang.birkfellner@meduniwien.ac.at (Wolfgang Birkfellner), 

Sepideh.Hatamikia@dp-uni.ac.at (Sepideh Hatamikia) 

> arXiv:2604.17389v1 [cs.CV] 19 Apr 2026

non-rigid volume-to-surface registration, enabling the estimation of dense displacement fields from sparse intra-operative surface observations without explicit point correspondences or volumetric intra-operative imaging. The proposed network leverages multi-scale point-based feature extraction and a hierarchical deformation decoder to model both global and local deforma-tions; however, the key contribution lies in the integration of partial intra-operative surface information into the full pre-operative point cloud domain, allowing implicit correspondence learning and dense deformation recovery under limited visibility. Quantitative results using Endpoint Error (EPE) of 1.13 ± 0.75 mm and RMSE of 1.33 ± 0.81 mm demonstrate stable per-formance and accurate recovery of fine-scale deformations under challenging partial-surface conditions compared with state-of-the-art non-rigid volume to surface point cloud registration methods. The proposed approach sup-ports automatic, workflow-compatible brain-shift compensation from sparse surface observations. 

Keywords: Non-rigid registration, Soft tissue deformation, Brain shift compensation, Deep learning, Deformation vector field (DVF), Point cloud registration 

1. Introduction 

Image-guided surgery relies on accurate spatial correspondence between pre-operative imaging and the intra-operative anatomy. In neurosurgical procedures in particular, pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), and functional imaging provide high-resolution structural information that supports planning, targeting, and risk assessment [1, 2, 3]. However, once the cranium is opened, the brain undergoes com-plex non-rigid deformations caused by gravity, cerebrospinal fluid drainage, swelling, resection, and patient-specific biomechanical factors. This phe-nomenon, commonly referred to as brain shift [4, 5], which is also known as brain deformation, arises from a combination of biological, physical, and surgical factors and affects both cortical and deep brain structures [6, 7, 8, 9]. To address brain shift compensation, existing methods aim to update pre-operative images based on intra-operative tissue deformation, often relying on imaging modalities such as MRI (iMR), ultrasound (iUS), laser range scanning (LRS), or stereo vision with pre-operative MRI [10, 11, 12, 13]. Based on these inputs, a range of registration strategies have been developed 2to estimate the underlying deformation including physics-based biomechan-ical models, image-based registration methods, and point cloud–based tech-niques. Several studies have demonstrated that biomechanical models can provide physically plausible deformation fields and meaningful interpretabil-ity. However, their reliance on such physics based biomechanical models on patient-specific material parameters, complex meshing, and iterative solvers often results in high computational cost. Moreover, these models typically re-quire intra-operative volumetric inputs or sparse displacement measurements, limiting their robustness when only partial surface information is available . A variety image-based non-rigid registration has been extensively studied using both traditional intensity-based methods and learning-based voxel-level registration frameworks. Intensity-based image registration methods attempt to directly align pre-operative and intra-operative images using intensity- or feature-based similarity measures attempt to directly align pre-operative and intra-operative images using intensity- or feature-based similarity measures [12, 13, 14], Despite their effectiveness, intensity-based methods rely on the availability of dense intra-operative imaging with sufficient contrast and spa-tial coverage. Furthermore, intensity-based optimisation can be sensitive to noise, modality differences, and missing structures, particularly when large deformations or resection cavities are present [15]. Deep learning has significantly advanced deformable image registration through voxel-based deep learning networks that directly predict dense dis-placement vector fields from image pairs. Models such as VoxelMorph [16], learn deformation fields in a supervised or unsupervised manner, enabling fast inference and scalable training across large datasets [17]. While voxel-based deep learning approaches achieve impressive performance in image-to-image registration, they inherit the fundamental assumption of dense volumetric intra-operative data. This assumption limits their applicability in neurosur-gical workflows where intra-operative imaging is sparse or unavailable. More-over, voxel-based representations are not naturally aligned with surface-based measurements acquired during surgery, making it difficult to directly exploit partial cortical surface information [18, 19]. All the mentioned techniques above are dependent on volumetric images taken during the intervention. 3Brain shift Data    

> T1 Postcontrast T2 Flair T2 Blade 3D SAG T2

Preoperative data         

> MR sequences
> T1 Precontrast T2 Flair T2 Blade Before Dural
> opening
> After Dural
> opening Before iMRI
> iMR sequences Intraoperative 3D US

Intraoperative data 

Costly, Time consuming, 

Limited accessibility 

Intraoperative Ultrasound 

Radiation Exposure 

Reduced sensitivity to minor brain shifts 

Costly, Time -consuming & Disruptive to Wokflow 

Limited FOV, Challenging registration 

Needs Clinical expertise 

Challenges in Operating room 

Intraoperative CT  Intraoperative MRI 

Preoperative 

MRI 

> Intraoperative Deformed
> partial Point Cloud

Using LRS/ StereoScopic Microscope and DL for non -rigid registration 

Preoperative Scene  Point Cloud aquisition 

Preoperative 

Point Cloud 

Preoperative 

Volumetric brain 

model 

> Displacement
> prediction

Deep learning Registration 

Framework  Updated brain 

> pointcloud
> Stereo
> Camera

Intraoperative Scene 

> Faster Reconstruction

Figure 1: Schematic overview of brain-shift data, limitations of intra-operative imaging modalities, and the proposed learning-based volume-to-surface registration framework in-tegrating pre-operative MRI, intra-operative surface acquisition, and deep neural network-based deformation field estimation. 

Intra-operative imaging modalities such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound (US) enable visualization of brain deformation dur-ing surgery and have been shown to improve tumor resection when combined with advanced registration techniques [13, 12]. However, intra-operative MRI 4is expensive, available in only a limited number of operating rooms, and the acquisition of advanced sequences can disrupt surgical workflow [20]. Ultra-sound imaging can be performed intra-operatively with minimal time over-head, but its limited image quality, restricted field of view, and differences from pre-operative MRI make accurate registration challenging and highly operator-dependent [20, 10, 21]. These limitations have motivated alterna-tive approaches based on partial surface data acquired intra-operatively using laser range scanners (LRS) or stereoscopic microscopes, [10, 11]. These sys-tems can be integrated into the operating room and provide high-resolution three-dimensional point clouds of the exposed cortical surface with minimal workflow disruption. Such partial surface observations can be registered to pre-operative models to estimate brain shift and deformation, highlighting the need for robust non-rigid point cloud registration methods capable of handling sparse and incomplete data. An overview of the clinical workflow, the limitations of intra-operative imaging, and the proposed learning-based volume-to-surface registration concept is illustrated in Fig. 1. Surface-based registration has recently gained attention as an alterna-tive to volumetric alignment in scenarios where intra-operative imaging is limited [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. Early approaches primarily rely on variants of the Iterative Closest Point (ICP)[28] algorithm, which estimate rigid or non-rigid NICP [29]transformations by minimizing point-to-point or point-to-surface distances. Although computationally efficient, ICP-based methods are highly sensitive to initialization, noise, and outliers, and assume substan-tial surface overlap and reliable correspondences. These assumptions are rarely satisfied in neurosurgical settings, where only partial cortical surfaces are visible. Recent learning-based methods aim to infer volumetric deforma-tion from sparse surface observations in the absence of dense intra-operative imaging. By conditioning deformation models on partial surface informa-tion, these approaches provide data-driven alternatives to classical interpola-tion and biomechanical simulation. PointNet [30, 31] Dynamic Graph CNN (DGCNN) [32], DeepGCNs [33] architectures enable direct feature learning from unordered point sets and have shown robustness to moderate defor-mation and noise. A comprehensive overview of deep learning approaches for point cloud registration and their taxonomy is provided in recent sur-vey literature [34]. These architectures enable direct feature learning from unordered point sets and have shown robustness to moderate deformation and noise. However, most existing frameworks focus on surface-to-surface alignment and typically estimate global transformations or sparse correspon-5dences, limiting their ability to recover dense volumetric deformation from partial observations [35, 36, 37] which is essential for accurate brain-shift compensation under limited visibility. In non-neurosurgical applications, learning-based volume-to-surface reg-istration has shown promising results. For organs such as the liver [38], lungs [39], ear [23], and prostate [40, 41] intra-operative surfaces or sparse land-marks often exhibit smoother, more globally correlated deformation patterns, and surface visibility is typically more extensive. Under these conditions, neural networks can learn mappings between surface motion and volumetric deformation using synthetic simulations, enabling reasonable deformation recovery within the organ interior. However, to date, such learning-based volume-to-surface approaches have not been successfully applied to brain shift compensation. Brain shift presents unique challenges due to severely limited and asymmetric surface visibility, highly heterogeneous and localized deformation patterns, and the need to infer displacement in large unobserved regions without direct intra-operative measurements. Many existing methods aim to align intra-operative surface observations with the pre-operative anatomy through surface-based registration, landmark matching, or correspondence estimation [42, 43, 44, 45]. These approaches primarily optimise the alignment of the observed cortical surface and there-fore focus on surface correspondence rather than volumetric deformation re-covery. However, brain shift compensation requires estimating the displace-ment field throughout the brain volume, including large regions where no direct intra-operative observations are available. Motivated by this gap, we propose a learning-based volume-to-surface non-rigid registration framework specifically designed for brain shift com-pensation. The method explicitly models the asymmetry between dense pre-operative anatomical models and sparse, partial intra-operative surface observations represented as point clouds. A multi-scale PointNet-based hi-erarchical deformation decoder is used to learn geometric priors from syn-thetic brain shift simulations and to predict dense displacement vector fields (DVFs) from incomplete cortical surface measurements. This design enables robust deformation estimation under limited visibility, noise, and missing cor-respondences, addressing key challenges that have prevented prior volume-to-surface learning approaches from being applied to brain shift. Experimental results demonstrate consistent improvements over state-of-the-art learning-based and classical registration methods across metrics including EPE and RMSE. The main contributions of this work are as follows: 6• We introduce a learning-based volume-to-surface registration frame-work tailored for brain shift compensation that explicitly models the asymmetry between dense pre-operative anatomy and sparse intra-operative cortical surface observations. 

• The method operates without the need for explicit one-to-one corre-spondences between the pre-operative point cloud and the partial intra-operative surface observations. 

• We design a training strategy based on synthetic brain shift simulations that enables the network to learn geometric deformation and recover volumetric deformation even in large unobserved regions. 

2. Methods 

Let us assume, 

P = {pi ∈ R3}Ni=1 (1) denotes the pre-operative point cloud, and 

S = {sj ∈ R3}Mj=1 (2) where P denotes the pre-operative volumetric point cloud and S repre-sents a partial intra-operative cortical surface observation. The two point sets are sampled independently from different anatomical states and therefore do not share a one-to-one correspondence. In particular, S is not a subset of 

P but rather a sparse observation of the deformed cortical surface obtained intra-operatively can be denoted as I. The objective of the proposed method is to estimate a volumetric displacement field that aligns the pre-operative anatomy with the observed intra-operative surface without requiring explicit point correspondences. The goal is to estimate a deformation field: 

ϕ : R3 → R3 (3) which maps points from the preoperative configuration to their intraopera-tive locations, while remaining consistent with the observed partial surface geometry and enforcing physically plausible deformation behavior. We pro-pose a learning-based framework for non-rigid volume-to-surface registration, 7where a complete preoperative point cloud P ∈ RB×NP ×3 is aligned to a par-tial intraoperative surface observation S ∈ RB×NS ×3. No explicit point-wise correspondences between P and S are assumed. The overall architecture is illustrated in figure 2. Preop erative  

> Pointcloud
> Partial Intraoperative
> Pointcloud
> SA
> Block
> mlp
> mlp
> SA
> Block
> mlp
> SA
> Block
> Bottleneck
> Encoder ( Downsample )
> SA
> Block
> mlp
> mlp
> mlp
> mlp
> mlp

𝑺 𝒏𝒐𝒊𝒔𝒚 

𝑳 𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒂𝒍  = 𝑳 𝟎 + 𝑳 𝟏 + 𝑳 𝟐 + 𝑳 𝟑 

𝑷 ∈ ℝ𝑩 ×𝑵 𝑷 ×𝟑 

𝑺  ∈ ℝ𝑩 ×𝑵 𝑺 ×𝟑          

> 𝜙 3= Global Deformation 𝜙 1=Mid scale deformation 𝜙 2= Coarse deformation

Decoder ( Upsampling )              

> 𝐿 2=𝐿 2x𝐾 2
> 𝐿 3=𝐿 3x𝐾 3
> 𝜙 0= Fine, Local deformation
> 𝐿 1=𝐿 1x𝐾 1
> Interpolation
> Transformer FP1
> 𝜙  1
> 𝐿 0=𝐿 0x𝐾 0
> Interpolation
> Transformer FP3
> 𝜙  3
> Interpolation
> Transformer FP2
> 𝜙  2
> Interpolation
> Transformer FP0
> 𝜙  0

Figure 2: Overview of the proposed volume-to-surface registration network. The network follows an encoder–decoder architecture, where the encoder extracts hierarchical features from the preoperative point cloud P and the partial intraoperative surface S using suc-cessive set abstraction (SA) blocks, followed by a bottleneck. The decoder progressively upsamples features via interpolation and Transformer-based feature propagation modules (FP0–FP3) to predict multi-scale deformation fields ϕ0–ϕ3, ranging from local to global deformations. The total loss is defined as the weighted sum across all scales. 

8𝑿 𝟎 ∈ ℝ𝐵 ×𝑁 ×3 

> N𝑆

Multi -Scale Point 

> Unit
> 3NN feature
> Interpolation

𝒇 𝒔 ∈ ℝ𝐵 ×𝑆 ×𝐶 𝑖𝑛   

> 𝑖𝑑𝑥 ∈ℕ𝐵 ×𝑆

Set Abstraction Module 

> Input Point Set

𝑿 𝟏 ∈ ℝ𝐵 ×𝑆 ×3       

> FPS Gathered Sampled
> Coordinates
> Linear Projection
> LayerNorm
> Layernorm
> Feed forward network
> Linear GELU Linear
> 3-NN interpolation
> Coarse feature
> 𝑩 ,𝑵 𝒄 ,𝑪 𝒄
> Fine feature
> 𝑩 ,𝑵 𝒇 ,𝑪 𝒇
> Upsampled Coarse Features

u

(𝑩 , 𝑵 𝒇 , 𝑪 𝒄 )

Feature fusion 

(𝑩 , 𝑵 𝒇 , 𝑪 𝒇 + 𝑪 𝒄 ) (𝑩 , 𝑵 𝒇 , 𝑪 𝒐𝒖𝒕 )                

> Output
> (+)
> (+)
> 𝑿 𝟏
> 𝑿
> Legends :
> 𝑩 = Batch size
> 𝑵 𝒄 = Coarse points
> 𝑵 𝒇 = Fine points
> 𝑪 𝒄 = Coarse channels
> 𝑪 𝒇 = Fine channels
> 𝑪 𝒐𝒖𝒕 = output channels
> (𝑩 ,𝑵 𝒇 ,𝑪 𝒐𝒖𝒕 )
> (Input to next
> decoder stage)
> Inputs
> Coarse Points
> 𝑿 𝒄
> (𝑩 ,𝑵 𝒄 ,𝟑 )
> Fine Points
> 𝑿 𝒇
> (𝑩 ,𝑵 𝒇 ,𝟑 )
> Coarse Features
> 𝑭 𝒄
> (𝑩 ,𝑵 𝒄 ,𝑪 )
> Fine Features
> 𝑭 𝒇
> (𝑩 ,𝑵 𝒄 ,𝑪 )
> Multi -Head Attention

Transformer -Based Feature Propagation Module 

𝒇 𝟏 ∈ ℝ𝐵 ×𝑆 ×𝐶 𝑜𝑢𝑡 

𝒇 𝟎 ∈ ℝ𝐵 ×𝑁 ×𝐶 𝑖𝑛 Figure 3: Set abstraction (top) and Transformer-based feature propagation (bottom) mod-ules. The SA module performs hierarchical downsampling using farthest point sampling (FPS), followed by feature interpolation and local aggregation via a multi-scale point unit to produce coarse representations. The FP-Transformer module propagates features from coarse to fine resolutions using 3-NN interpolation, fuses them with fine-level features, and refines the representation using a Transformer encoder with residual connections. The out-put corresponds to refined fine-level features used in subsequent decoding stages. 

Architecture overview: The network follows an encoder–decoder de-sign that learns hierarchical geometric features and predicts deformation fields in a coarse-to-fine manner. Such a design is widely adopted in de-formable registration, as it enables the model to first capture large-scale structural variations at coarse resolutions and subsequently refine finer ge-ometric details at higher resolutions. The encoder encodes multi-scale geo-metric context, while the decoder progressively refines deformation estimates at increasing spatial resolutions. 

Encoder: hierarchical feature extraction: The encoder processes the input point clouds using a sequence of Set Abstraction (SA) modules 9[31] (Fig. 3, top). Given input coordinates and features (x0, f 0), where 

x0 ∈ RB×N ×3 and f0 ∈ RB×N ×Cin , each SA module performs farthest point sampling (FPS) to obtain a reduced set of points x1 ∈ RB×S×3. Features are transferred to the sampled points via 3-nearest neighbor interpolation, yielding fs ∈ RB×S×Cin , followed by local geometric aggregation using a multi-scale point unit to produce refined features f1 ∈ RB×S×Cout . Stacking multiple SA levels constructs a hierarchical representation {(xl, f l)}Ll=0 , where spatial resolution decreases while feature abstraction increases. This allows the network to capture both local surface structure and global anatomical context. 

Multi-scale feature learning Multi-scale feature learning is incorpo-rated within each Set Abstraction (SA) module through the Multi-Scale Point Unit, as shown in Fig. 3 (top). This unit performs local geometric aggrega-tion over neighborhoods of different spatial extents, enabling the encoder to capture both fine-scale surface details and broader structural context. Such multi-scale aggregation is particularly beneficial when only partial intraop-erative observations are available. 

Bottleneck representation: At the coarsest level, the encoder pro-duces a compact latent representation summarizing the global geometry of the preoperative anatomy and its relationship to the observed intraoperative surface. This representation provides global context for subsequent deforma-tion estimation. 

Decoder transformer-based feature propagation: The decoder re-constructs point-wise features at higher resolutions using a sequence of fea-ture propagation blocks (Fig. 3, bottom). At each stage, coarse features 

(xc, f c) are interpolated onto a finer point set xf using 3-NN interpolation: 

u ∈ RB×Nf ×Cc (4) The interpolated features are concatenated with fine-level features ff to form fused representations in 

RB×Nf ×(Cf +Cc) (5) Unlike conventional PointNet++ decoders that rely on shared MLPs, we employ a Transformer encoder to refine these fused features. The Trans-former models long-range dependencies across points via self-attention, en-abling global reasoning about deformation patterns. Residual connections and feed-forward layers further stabilize feature refinement. 10 Multiscale deformation prediction: Deformation fields are predicted at multiple decoder stages. At each level k, the network outputs a displace-ment field 

uk(x) ∈ R3 (6) representing point-wise 3D displacements at that resolution. Early decoder stages capture coarse, global deformations, while later stages refine local, high-frequency motion. 

Output deformation field and training objective: The final defor-mation field is obtained from the highest-resolution prediction: 

ϕ(x) = uK (x) (7) which provides a dense displacement field aligning the preoperative point cloud to the intraoperative observation. The network is trained in a fully su-pervised manner, where the predicted displacement fields are directly com-pared with the ground-truth deformation field. To stabilize training and enforce consistency across multiple resolutions, deep supervision is applied [46]. The total loss is defined as: 

Ltotal =

> K

X

> k=0

λk Lk (8) where Lk denotes the loss at scale k, computed between the predicted dis-placement field uk(x) and the corresponding ground-truth deformation field 

ϕgt (x), and λk are weighting coefficients. Each scale-specific loss is defined as: 

Lk = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

∥uk(xi) − ϕgt (xi)∥2 (9) The final predicted deformation field ϕ(x) is then used to warp the pre-operative point cloud, enabling alignment with the observed intraoperative surface. 

2.1. Dataset 

A publicly available brain MRI dataset from The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA), specifically the Brain Resection Multimodal Imaging Database (Re-MIND) [47], was used to obtain patient-specific preoperative anatomical 11 models. In this work, only the preoperative imaging data were utilized, while intraoperative observations and deformation fields were synthetically gener-ated. For each case, the preoperative MRI was processed to extract a brain surface mesh, which was subsequently represented as a dense point cloud. Synthetic deformations and partial intraoperative observations were gener-ated for training, illustrated in Fig. 4. Further details on data generation and deformation modeling are provided in Section 2.2. Preoperative  Deformed GT 

> Intraoperative
> Extracted
> Partial Surface
> Partial & GT
> Overlap
> Partial & Preoperative
> Overlap

Figure 4: Visualization of the training data generation for the proposed volume-to-surface registration framework across multiple cases. For each example, the pre-operative point cloud ( P , gray) is synthetically deformed to produce the ground-truth intra-operative configuration ( Igt , green). A partial surface ( S, orange) is extracted from Igt to simulate intra-operative surface observations. The final two columns show the overlap between S

and Igt , and between S and P , respectively, illustrating the input configuration used for training. 

12 2.1.1. Data Representation 

In this study, the preoperative point cloud represents the anatomical configuration of the patient’s brain prior to surgery, including the cortical surface, tumor, and ventricular structures. This point cloud serves as the undeformed reference state. The intraoperative point cloud corresponds to a deformed configuration of the brain surface under different deformation constraints. To reflect the limited visibility typically available during neurosurgical procedures, only a subset of the deformed cortical surface is extracted and treated as a partial point cloud. This setting mimics the intraoperative scenario, where only a restricted portion of the cortex is observable. The objective of registering the preoperative point cloud P with the partial intraoperative surface S is to estimate a dense volumetric deformation field ϕ(x). Specifically, we aim to infer how the preoperative anatomy deforms intraoperatively under given deformation constraints, despite having access to only sparse and partial surface observations. 

2.2. Data Generation 

To enable supervised learning and controlled evaluation of volume-to-surface registration under partial observability, we construct a synthetic dataset of preoperative and intraoperative brain configurations with known ground-truth deformations. A total of 10 patients were used, from which approximately 1500 synthetic deformations per case were generated, yielding around 15,000 samples. The dataset was split into 70% training, 15% vali-dation, and 15% testing sets. Each preoperative model was represented by approximately Np points. For each sample, a dense intraoperative point cloud 

I ∈ RNp×3 was generated via synthetic deformation, maintaining a one-to-one correspondence with P . Partial intraoperative observations S ∈ RNs×3

were then extracted from I at different visibility levels (vis25–vis65), with 

Ns < N p. Each sample thus consists of (P, I, S, Φ) , where P ∈ RNp×3 de-notes the preoperative point cloud, I ∈ RNp×3 the dense intraoperative con-figuration, S ∈ RNs×3 the partial intraoperative surface, and Φ ∈ RNp×3 the corresponding displacement field. Details of the synthetic data generation pipeline are provided in the following subsections. 

2.2.1. Anatomical Model Construction 

A high-resolution preoperative brain MRI from the REMIND dataset is first segmented using 3D Slicer [48], to obtain separate volumetric segmen-13 tations of the brain, tumor, and ventricles. Each segmentation is converted into an individual 3D surface mesh with Gmesh [49] and meshmixer [50] which is subsequently represented as a point cloud. Individual meshes of the brain surface, ventricular, and tumor region were preprocessed can be seen in figure 5 and spatially aligned before being integrated into a unified com-posite model figure 6 (a). The segmented brain, tumor, and ventricle models are then digitally injected, spatially aligned and merged into a single unified anatomical representation. This composite model serves as the preoperative reference configuration and captures both cortical and internal anatomical structures relevant to brain-shift modeling. 

> Figure 5: Simplified surface mesh models of the anatomical components used in this study, including the brain surface (blue), ventricular system (orange), and tumor region (green).

14 Figure 6: (a) Visualization of the combined anatomical model used for dataset generation. The tumor and ventricular structures are integrated within the brain surface to form a unified geometric representation . (b) Illustrates the corresponding sampled point cloud representation employed for learning-based deformation modeling. 

2.2.2. Deformation Simulation 

To generate intraoperative configurations, synthetic non-rigid deforma-tions are applied to the unified preoperative model. These deformations are designed to mimic plausible intraoperative brain shift patterns while pre-serving anatomical coherence across cortical and subsurface structures. The corresponding pseudocode is presented in algorithm 1. 

Analytic deformation operators: We generate synthetic deformations using analytically defined operators applied directly to mesh vertices. Let 

v ∈ R3 denote a vertex, and let n(v) be the corresponding unit vertex normal. 

(i) Bulge operator B (normal-directed Gaussian bump) A local-ized bulge centered at a point cb ∈ R3 is defined as 

B(v) = v + s exp 



−

∥v−cb∥

> r

2

n(v) (10) where r controls the spatial extent and s controls the deformation magnitude. 

(ii) Sliding operator S (plane-gated translation) Given a plane defined by a point p and unit normal ˆn, we compute signed distance d(v) = (v − p)⊤ ˆn and apply a smooth shift 

S(v) = v + exp 



−

max(0 ,d (v)) 

> w

2

∆t (11) 15 where w controls the transition width and ∆t ∈ R3 is a displacement vector defining the direction and magnitude of the translation. The deformation is applied only to vertices with positive signed distance to the plane and is smoothly attenuated with increasing distance from the plane. 

(iii) Twist operator T (radius-decayed rotation around an axis) 

Let the twist axis be defined by a point a ∈ R3 and a unit direction u ∈ R3.For each vertex, we compute the component of (v − a) orthogonal to the axis, 

r⊥ = ( v − a) −  (v − a)⊤uu,

and its magnitude r = ∥r⊥∥. The rotation angle is then defined as 

θ(v) = θmax exp 



−

 rr0

2

(12) where r0 controls the spatial decay of the twist. The orthogonal component 

r⊥ is then rotated about the axis defined by u using Rodrigues’ rotation formula. 

(iv) Global warp operator W (sinusoidal displacement field). Asmooth global displacement field is defined as follows. For a vertex v =(x, y, z )⊤,

∆x = a sin( fx y + φx) (13a) 

∆y = a sin( fy z + φy) (13b) 

∆z = a sin( fz x + φz ) (13c) where a denotes the displacement amplitude, fx, f y, f z are spatial frequen-cies, and φx, φ y, φ z are phase offsets that shift the sinusoidal deformation along each axis. The warped vertex is given by 

W(v) = v + (∆ x, ∆y, ∆z)⊤

Composite deformation: The composite mode applies an ordered compo-sition of operators: 

C(v) = W(T (S(B(v)))) (14) with parameters sampled from predefined ranges and anchored using the preoperative axis-aligned bounding box (AABB) center to ensure consistent deformation across anatomical structures. 16 Post-deformation smoothing: To reduce high-frequency artifacts in-troduced by the analytic deformation operators, the deformed meshes are further regularized using Taubin smoothing [51]. This smoothing is applied iteratively with fixed parameters, preserving the overall deformation while improving surface regularity. 

Algorithm 1: Synthetic deformation generation (Open3D-based analytic operators) 

Input: Set of mesh pairs {(M pre c , M intra c )}Nc=1 ;where c indexes the case and N is the total number of mesh pairs ;deformation mode set M = {global , combo }, where global denotes a global non-rigid deformation, and composite denotes a sequential composition of deformation operators (bulge, sliding, twisting, and global warp); number of variations V ;smoothing flag 

Output: Deformed mesh pairs saved to disk 

foreach mesh pair (M pre c , M intra c ) do 

Load meshes M pre c and M intra c

Compute vertex normals Compute AABB center c from M pre c

foreach mode m ∈ M do for v ← 1 to V do 

Set deterministic seed from (c, m, v ) and sample parameters θc,m,v 

if m = global then 

fM pre ← GlobalWarp (M pre c ; θc,m,v )

fM intra ← GlobalWarp (M intra c ; θc,m,v )

else 

fM pre ← CompositeDeform (M pre c ; θc,m,v )

fM intra ← CompositeDeform (M intra c ; θc,m,v )

if smoothing then 

fM pre ← TaubinSmooth ( fM pre )

fM intra ← TaubinSmooth ( fM intra )

Save ( fM pre , fM intra ) with standardized naming The applied deformation defines a dense ground-truth volumetric dis-17 placement field ϕ(x), which is used to warp the preoperative point cloud and produce a fully deformed brain model. This deformed configuration repre-sents the intraoperative anatomy and provides exact point-wise displacement supervision for training and evaluation. 

2.2.3. Partial Surface Extraction 

To emulate the limited field of view available during neurosurgical proce-dures, only partial observations of the deformed cortical surface are retained. Specifically, random surface patches are extracted from the deformed brain surface under different visibility ratios, resulting in partial intraoperative point clouds can be seen in Figure 7. Preoperative  Deformed GT        

> Intraoperative Vis 25 Vis 35 Vis 45 Vis 55 Vis 65
> Figure 7: Visualization of partial intraoperative surface observations extracted from a sin-gle deformed brain configuration at different visibility levels. The first two panels show the preoperative point cloud and the corresponding deformed intraoperative configura-tion. Subsequent panels illustrate progressively extracted larger visible surface regions (vis25–vis65), simulating varying levels of cortical surface exposure during surgery.

By varying the spatial extent and location of these extracted surface re-gions, multiple levels of surface visibility are simulated. This process enables systematic evaluation of registration performance under increasingly sparse and incomplete intraoperative observations, while maintaining a fixed under-lying volumetric deformation. The final dataset therefore consists of paired samples comprising: (i) a complete preoperative point cloud, (ii) a partial intraoperative surface point cloud(with different visibility ratio), and (iii) the corresponding ground-truth volumetric deformation vector field. 

3. Experiments 

3.1. Noise Augmentation 

To simulate intra-operative surface measurement uncertainty, noise aug-mentation was applied only to the partial intra-operative surface point cloud 18 S during training. A composite noise model was used, consisting of (i) addi-tive Gaussian jitter and (ii) a smooth spatially coherent displacement field, capturing both independent localization errors and correlated surface distor-tions arising from tissue motion and probe interaction. a a a

> Figure 8: Surface augmentation under increasing noise levels. Top: clean and noisy point clouds. Bottom: probability density of per-point displacement magnitude (mm) between clean and noisy surfaces.

Let si ∈ R3 denote a point on the normalized surface point cloud S, where normalization is performed by centering at the mean of V and scaling by its maximum radius. Gaussian noise is applied as 

˜si = si + ϵi, ϵi ∼ N (0 , σ 2

> n

I), (15) where σn = σmm /(scale + ϵ) and σmm ∼ U (0 , 5) mm. To model spatially correlated distortions, a smooth displacement field d(s)

is defined using control points {gj } placed on a coarse grid in the normalized space. Each control point is assigned a random displacement vector 

dj = an · ˜dj , ˜dj ∼ N (0 , I ), (16) where an = amm /(scale + ϵ) controls the deformation magnitude and amm ∼U(0 , 15) mm. 19 For each surface point si, the displacement is computed via inverse-distance weighted interpolation from its k nearest control points: 

d(si) = X 

> j∈N k(si)

wij dj , wij = ∥si − gj ∥−1

P  

> l∈N k(si)

∥si − gl∥−1 . (17) The final perturbed surface point is given by 

ˆsi = ˜ si + d(si). (18) This formulation introduces realistic surface perturbations while preserving local geometric consistency. Noise is applied only to the observed partial sur-face S, while the pre-operative anatomy and ground-truth displacement field remain unchanged. Figure 8 illustrates representative noisy surface samples under increasing noise levels and the corresponding distribution of per-point perturbation magnitudes. 

3.2. Evaluation Metrics 

Registration performance was evaluated using endpoint error (EPE), root-mean-square error (RMSE). Let {xi}Ni=1 denote the set of sampled points in the preoperative space, ugt 

> i

the corresponding ground-truth displacement vectors, and upred  

> i

the predicted displacements. 

Endpoint Error (EPE).. The endpoint error measures the Euclidean distance between predicted and ground-truth displacement vectors: 

EPE = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

upred  

> i

− ugt  

> i2

. (19) 

Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE).. RMSE quantifies the global displace-ment error across all spatial dimensions: 

RMSE = 

vuut 13N

> N

X

> i=1

upred  

> i

− ugt 

> i
> 22

. (20) 20 3.3. Implementation Details and Training Settings 

The proposed network was implemented in PyTorch and trained on an NVIDIA A100 GPU. The architecture employs a multi-scale decoder with 

K = 3 hierarchical levels, producing four displacement fields {uk}4

> k=0

. These outputs are fused using fixed weights (α0, α 1, α 2, α 3) = (1 .0, 0.3, 0.3, 0.05) .For the number of points in the point cloud, an optimal threshold of 12000 points for the preoperative 6000 for the partial intraopertive surface was kept which allowed us train with different number of points without performing strict resampling. The model was optimized using the AdamW optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −3 and a weight decay of 1 × 10 −4. A cosine learning rate scheduler was employed to facilitate stable convergence. Training was conducted for 100 epochs with a batch size of 2. Automatic mixed precision was used to accelerate training and reduce memory consumption. All network parameters were initialized using He ini-tialization. The total training time was approximately 37 hours per experi-ment. The smoothness regularization weight was set to λs = 0 .1, which was selected empirically based on validation performance. 

3.3.1. Baselines and Comparison Methods 

All baseline methods, including ICP, CPD, Livermatch, C2P-Net, and DefReg, were implemented using either publicly available official code or carefully reimplemented following the original publications when code was unavailable. For learning-based methods, training was performed on the same dataset using identical data splits and preprocessing as the proposed model to ensure a fair comparison. Hyperparameters were selected based on recommendations from the respective papers or tuned minimally for sta-ble convergence. All methods were evaluated under the same experimental protocol. 

4. Results 

4.1. Qualitative 

Figs. 9 and 10 present qualitative comparisons of different learning based registration methods under partial intraoperative surface observations for two representative cases. The first row shows the partial intraoperative surface (orange) overlaid on the preoperative (gray), and the Preoperative overlaid on 21 the ground-truth intraoperative pointcloud. The subsequent rowa compare the outputs of the evaluated methods, with corresponding point-wise error maps (mm). Across both cases, the proposed method consistently achieves more accu-rate alignment and lower error compared to the competing approaches. In Case 1 (Fig. 9), the proposed method attains an EPE of 2.04 mm, whereas alternative methods exhibit substantially higher errors, reaching up to 11.41 mm. A similar trend is observed in Case 2 (Fig. 10), where the proposed method maintains low error (1.83 mm), while other methods show increased misalignment, particularly in regions distant from the observed surface. Qualitatively, the competing methods tend to produce noticeable devia-tions in anatomically complex regions (highlighted by the red circles), with errors propagating beyond the locally observed areas. In contrast, the pro-posed approach preserves the global structure more effectively and yields more coherent alignment across the entire surface. These results suggest that the proposed framework better captures global deformation patterns from partial observations, leading to improved robustness and generalization under limited intraoperative visibility. 22 C2PNet & GT overlap 

Robust DefReg &

GT overlap Proposed & GT overlap 

Livermatch &

GT overlap 

Preoperative & Partial 

Overlap 

Preoperative & GT 

Overlap 

> Corresponding Error
> magnitude(mm)  Registered result

Figure 9: Qualitative comparison of registration performance across different learning based methods for Case 1. 

23 C2PNet & GT overlap    

> Robust DefReg &
> GT overlap Proposed & GT overlap
> Livermatch &
> GT overlap
> Preoperative & Partial
> Overlap
> Preoperative & GT
> Overlap
> Corresponding Error
> magnitude(mm)  Registered result

Figure 10: Qualitative comparison of registration performance across different learning based methods for case 2 

4.1.1. Impact of Intraoperative Surface Coverage and Spatial Distribution 

The qualitative ablation in Fig. 11, 12, 13 suggests that both visibility extent and spatial coverage influence registration performance, although not equally. In Cases 3, 4 and 4 increasing the visible surface from 25% to 45% results in improved alignment and lower error, indicating that additional intraoperative observations provide stronger geometric guidance for defor-mation estimation. However, Case 3 and 4 shows that accurate registration can still be achieved even when the visible surface does not predominantly cover the tumor-side or anticipated craniotomy region. This finding suggests that the proposed network is able to leverage global anatomical structure and learned deformation regularities, rather than relying solely on direct observa-tions from the most clinically relevant local area. These results indicate that 

how much of the intraoperative surface is seen generally matters, whereas 

where it is seen may be less critical when sufficient global context is retained. 24 Vis 55%  Vis 25% 

Preoperative & Partial 

Overlap 

Preoperative & GT 

Overlap 

Registered & GT 

Overlap  Error Magnitute Figure 11: Registration result of Case 3: 25% vs. 45% visibility Vis 55%  Vis 25% 

Preoperative & Partial 

Overlap 

Preoperative & GT 

Overlap 

Registered & GT 

Overlap  Error Magnitute 

Figure 12: Registration result of Case 4: 25% vs. 45% visibility 

25 Vis 55%  Vis 25%      

> Preoperative & Partial
> Overlap
> Preoperative & GT
> Overlap
> Registered &GT
> Overlap Error Magnitute

Figure 13: Registration result of Case 5: 25% vs. 45% visibility 

Figure 14: Distribution of registration errors under varying surface visibility. (a) Distri-bution of end-point error (EPE) across different visibility ratios. (b) Distribution of root mean square error (RMSE) between the registered preoperative and ground-truth intraop-erative configurations. Each violin represents the error distribution over all test samples for a given visibility level (25–65%). Increasing surface visibility leads to progressively reduced error and more stable registration performance. 

4.2. Quantitative Evaluation 

We quantitatively evaluated the registration performance of the pro-posed framework using the endpoint error (EPE) and root-mean-square error 26 (RMSE), both reported in millimeters (mm). Lower values indicate better alignment accuracy. All results are reported as mean ± standard deviation over the test set. Table 1 presents a comparative evaluation of our method against several classical and learning-based baselines. Among all evaluated approaches, the proposed method achieves the lowest registration error in terms of both EPE and RMSE.  

> Table 1: Quantitative comparison of registration accuracy in terms of endpoint error (EPE) and root-mean-square error (RMSE). Lower values indicate better performance.

Initial misalignment 

EPE: 8.13 ± 4.47 mm RMSE: 7.42 ± 3.64 mm 

Model EPE (mm) RMSE (mm) ICP [28] 18 .94 ± 13 .08 21 .20 ± 10 .09 

CPD [52] 16 .76 ± 8.34 14 .60 ± 6.24 

NICP [29] 15 .57 ± 3.51 11 .66 ± 1.89 

Livermatch [53] 9.55 ± 6.12 10 .69 ± 7.43 

C2P-Net [23] 6.87 ± 3.14 7.51 ± 4.03 

Robust DefReg [54] 4.65 ± 1.98 6.46 ± 2.09 

Proposed method 1.13 ± 0.75 1.33 ± 0.81 

Specifically, our approach obtains an EPE of 1.13 ± 0.75 mm and an RMSE of 1.33 ± 0.81 mm, outperforming all competing methods by a sub-stantial margin. In contrast, traditional ICP exhibits limited performance due to its reliance on rigid or locally rigid correspondences, resulting in high residual errors. Similarly, learning-based baselines such as Livermatch, C2P-Net, DefReg, and demonstrate improved performance compared to ICP, but remain clearly inferior to the proposed framework. The superior accuracy of our method can be attributed to its dedicated deformation modeling strategy and its ability to effectively learn the rela-tionship between partial surface observations and volumetric displacement 27 fields. Unlike existing approaches that primarily focus on surface-to-surface alignment, our framework directly optimizes volumetric consistency, leading to more accurate and stable registration results. 

4.2.1. Robustness to Surface Noise 

To assess the robustness of the proposed framework under noisy surface observations, we evaluated registration accuracy under different combinations of Gaussian noise and smoothing perturbations. The results are summarized in Table 2. 

> Table 2: Registration accuracy under fixed surface noise levels (test set).

σmm amm EPE (mm) ↓ RMSE (mm) ↓

0 0 1.19 ± 0.75 1.33 ± 0.81 

1 5 1.63 ± 0.72 1.79 ± 0.76 

2 10 2.23 ± 0.85 2.39 ± 0.91 

5 15 2.60 ± 1.02 2.77 ± 1.06 

As shown in Table 2, the registration performance degrades gradually as the noise level increases. When no noise is applied ( σmm = 0 , αmm = 0 ), the model achieves an EPE of 1.19 ± 0.75 mm and an RMSE of 1.33 ± 0.81 mm. Even under the highest noise setting ( σmm = 5 mm, αmm = 15 mm), the error remains limited, with an EPE of 2.60 ± 1.02 mm and an RMSE of 

2.77 ± 1.06 mm. This relatively small increase in error indicates that the proposed method is robust to surface perturbations. The gradual performance degradation suggests that the network learns stable geometric features and is not overly sensitive to local surface irregularities. This robustness is particularly impor-tant in neurosurgical scenarios, where intra-operative surface measurements are often affected by noise, occlusions, and reconstruction artifacts. Table 3 compares the RMSE values of different methods under noisy surface conditions. While all baseline methods suffer noticeable performance degradation, the proposed framework consistently maintains the lowest error. In particular, our method achieves an RMSE of 2.77 ± 1.06 mm, which is significantly lower than, Robust DefReg ( 7.05 ± 3.43 mm). Traditional ICP and CPD also exhibits poor robustness, with an RMSE of 17 .64 ± 8.12 mm and 23 .16 ± 13 .56 mm. 28 Table 3: Comparison of RMSE (mm, Mean ± SD) of different algorithms under noisy surface observations.                                            

> Initial misalignment RMSE: 7.42 ±3.64 mm
> Model RMSE w/ noise RMSE w/o noise ICP 23 .16 ±13 .56 21 .20 ±10 .09
> CPD 17 .64 ±8.12 14 .60 ±6.24
> Livermatch 10 .23 ±5.31 10 .69 ±7.43
> C2P-Net 8.38 ±6.29 7.51 ±4.03
> Robust DefReg 7.05 ±3.43 6.46 ±2.09
> Proposed method 2.77 ±1.06 1.33 ±0.81

These results indicate that existing approaches struggle to handle incom-plete and corrupted surface observations, often leading to unstable defor-mation estimates. In contrast, the proposed framework effectively leverages learned volumetric priors and multi-scale deformation modeling, allowing it to recover accurate displacement fields even under severe noise. 

4.2.2. Performance under different visibility Ratio 

Table 4 reports the registration performance of the proposed framework under varying levels of surface visibility. Different visibility ratios are consid-ered to simulate realistic intra-operative conditions, where only partial and incomplete cortical surfaces are typically available due to limited surgical exposure, occlusions, and noise. As the visibility ratio increases, a consistent improvement in registration accuracy is observed, reflected by the monotonic decrease in EPE and RMSE values from 25% to 65% visibility. 29 Table 4: Comparison of registration performance the proposed framework under different surface visibility. 

Visibility ratio EPE RMSE 25% 1.98 ± 0.77 2.01 ± 0.83 

35% 1.25 ± 0.57 1.42 ± 0.62 

45% 1.06 ± 0.45 1.21 ± 0.51 

55% 0.96 ± 0.40 1.09 ± 0.45 

65% 0.93 ± 0.38 1.06 ± 0.43 

At low visibility levels (25%–35%), the proposed method maintains stable performance despite severely limited surface observations, indicating its abil-ity to infer volumetric deformations from sparse geometric cues. Further im-provements are achieved at intermediate visibility ratios (45%–55%), where additional surface information provides stronger constraints for deformation estimation. At higher visibility levels ( ≥55%), the errors approach < 1 mm , demonstrating near-perfect alignment when sufficient cortical coverage is available. 

4.3. Real-Time Capability (Frame Rate) 

The computational efficiency of the proposed framework was evaluated in terms of the average processing time per sample and the corresponding frames per second (FPS). For each input pair (V, S ), the total runtime con-sists of two components: (i) the forward pass of the network to predict the dense deformation vector field ϕ, and (ii) the subsequent deformation update applied to the preoperative point cloud. The total runtime is defined as: 

Ttotal = Tinference + Tupdate (21) where Tinference denotes the time required for a single forward pass of the network, and Tupdate corresponds to the point-wise deformation step: 

Vreg = V + ϕ (22) To facilitate comparison with existing methods, the runtime is addition-ally reported in terms of frames per second (FPS), computed as: FPS = 1000 

Ttotal 

(23) 30 where Ttotal is expressed in milliseconds.          

> Table 5: Runtime analysis of the proposed framework. The end-to-end time includes both inference time corresponding one forward pass to predict the deformation vector field followed by registration (V, S )→ϕ→Vreg =V+ϕ.

Method Time Per sample(ms) ↓ FPS ↑

CPD 75288.15 0.1 ICP 216.99 4.61 Non-rigid ICP 414.40 2.41 Robust DefReg 861.73 1.16 

Proposed end-to-end update 175.28 5.71 

All measurements were conducted on an NVIDIA A100 GPU. Classical baselines (ICP, CPD, and their non-rigid variants) were evaluated using their standard implementations under comparable settings. 

5. Discussion & Conclusion 

This study addresses the problem of estimating dense volumetric defor-mation from sparse and partial intra-operative surface observations. In con-trast to conventional image-to-image registration methods that rely on dense intra-operative imaging, the proposed framework learns to infer displacement vector fields directly from limited cortical surface measurements. This formu-lation reflects realistic neurosurgical constraints, where only partial surface visibility is available and repeated volumetric imaging may disrupt workflow. The quantitative results demonstrate consistent improvements over both classical and learning-based baselines. The proposed method achieves an EPE of 1.13 ± 0.75 mm and an RMSE of 1.33 ± 0.81 mm, outperforming recent point-based learning approaches by a substantial margin. Traditional ICP exhibits high residual errors due to its sensitivity to initialization and its inability to model complex non-rigid deformation. Although learning-based baselines improve performance compared to ICP and CPD, they primarily focus on surface alignment and do not explicitly model volumetric deforma-tion consistency. In contrast, the proposed framework directly supervises dense displacement fields, enabling more stable and anatomically coherent predictions. 31 The proposed method also demonstrates favorable computational effi-ciency. The end-to-end runtime of 175.28 ms per sample corresponds to approximately 5.71 FPS. In contrast, classical methods such as CPD and non-rigid ICP require iterative optimization, resulting in significantly higher runtimes. The single forward-pass inference combined with a direct deforma-tion update allows the proposed framework to maintain both accuracy and computational efficiency, which is critical for intra-operative deployment. The robustness analysis under different surface noise conditions further supports the stability of the proposed approach. As noise levels increase, registration accuracy degrades gradually rather than abruptly. Even under the highest noise setting, the error increase remains moderate. This behavior suggests that the network does not overfit to precise surface correspondences but instead learns deformation priors that are resilient to local surface irreg-ularities and spatially coherent perturbations. Such robustness is essential in neurosurgical settings, where intra-operative surface acquisition is inherently affected by measurement uncertainty, occlusion, and reconstruction artifacts. The visibility experiments reveal a clear relationship between surface cov-erage and deformation accuracy. As the visibility ratio increases from 25% to 65%, both EPE and RMSE decrease monotonically. However, the model maintains stable performance even at low visibility levels, indicating that it can infer volumetric deformation from sparse geometric cues. This ability is particularly important for brain shift compensation, where surgical exposure is limited and asymmetric. The hierarchical decoder and multi-scale feature aggregation likely contribute to this behavior by combining global structural context with fine-scale geometric reasoning. Compared to previously reported volume-to-surface learning approaches in other anatomical regions, brain shift presents additional challenges due to heterogeneous deformation patterns and severely restricted surface visibil-ity. The proposed framework explicitly addresses this asymmetry between a complete pre-operative model and a partial intra-operative observation. By integrating multi-scale feature extraction with progressive deformation refine-ment, the method demonstrates that volumetric deformation recovery from sparse cortical data is feasible without reliance on intra-operative volumetric imaging. Despite these promising results, several limitations should be acknowl-edged. The deformation fields used for training are generated synthetically using analytic operators. While designed to approximate plausible intra-operative patterns, they may not capture the full biomechanical complexity 32 of real brain shift. Furthermore, evaluation is conducted on simulated par-tial surfaces derived from MRI-based models rather than real intra-operative stereo or LRS acquisitions. The current framework also does not explicitly enforce biomechanical constraints such as incompressibility or diffeomorphic regularity. Future work should explore integration of physics-informed pri-ors, validation on real intra-operative surface datasets, and clinical studies assessing navigation improvement. Overall, the findings indicate that learning volumetric deformation di-rectly from sparse surface observations is a viable and effective strategy for brain shift compensation. The proposed framework offers a workflow-compatible alternative to intra-operative volumetric imaging and provides a scalable foundation for near real-time soft-tissue deformation tracking in image-guided neurosurgery. 

Acknowledgement: This study has been supported by the ACMIT COMET Competence Center (FFG project number: 879733, application number: 28997164) and the COMET Module SD-OpT (FFG project number: FO999888360, application number: 39955962), both funded by the federal government of Austria and the governments of the provinces Lower Aus-tria and Tyrol. In addition, Ander Biguri acknowledges the Accelerate Pro-gramme for Scientific Discovery. 

References 

[1] C.-C. Liao, F. Xiao, J.-M. Wong, I.-J. Chiang, Automatic recognition of midline shift on brain ct images, Computers in biology and medicine 40 (2010) 331–339. [2] P. Hastreiter, C. Rezk-Salama, G. Soza, M. Bauer, G. Greiner, R. Fahlbusch, O. Ganslandt, C. Nimsky, Strategies for brain shift eval-uation, Medical image analysis 8 (2004) 447–464. [3] V. M. Pereira, I. Smit-Ockeloen, O. Brina, D. Babic, M. Breeuwer, K. Schaller, K.-O. Lovblad, D. Ruijters, Volumetric measurements of brain shift using intraoperative cone-beam computed tomography: pre-liminary study, Operative Neurosurgery 12 (2016) 4–13. 33 [4] P. J. Kelly, B. A. Kall, S. Goerss, F. Earnest, Computer-assisted stereo-taxic laser resection of intra-axial brain neoplasms, Journal of neuro-surgery 64 (1986) 427–439. [5] C. Schulz, S. Waldeck, U. M. Mauer, Intraoperative image guidance in neurosurgery: development, current indications, and future trends, Radiology research and practice 2012 (2012) 197364. [6] I. J. Gerard, M. Kersten-Oertel, K. Petrecca, D. Sirhan, J. A. Hall, D. L. Collins, Brain shift in neuronavigation of brain tumors: A review, Medical image analysis 35 (2017) 403–420. [7] T. Mitsui, M. Fujii, M. Tsuzaka, Y. Hayashi, Y. Asahina, T. Wak-abayashi, Skin shift and its effect on navigation accuracy in image-guided neurosurgery, Radiological physics and technology 4 (2011) 37– 42. [8] D. L. Hill, C. R. Maurer Jr, R. J. Maciunas, J. A. Barwise, M. J. Fitz-patrick, M. Y. Wang, Measurement of intraoperative brain surface de-formation under a craniotomy, Neurosurgery 43 (1998) 514–526. [9] M. A. Hammoud, B. L. Ligon, R. Elsouki, W. M. Shi, D. F. Schomer, R. Sawaya, Use of intraoperative ultrasound for localizing tumors and determining the extent of resection: a comparative study with magnetic resonance imaging, Journal of neurosurgery 84 (1996) 737–741. [10] X. Yang, L. W. Clements, M. Luo, S. Narasimhan, R. C. Thompson, B. M. Dawant, M. I. Miga, Stereovision-based integrated system for point cloud reconstruction and simulated brain shift validation, Journal of Medical Imaging 4 (2017) 035002–035002. [11] T. K. Sinha, V. Duay, B. M. Dawant, M. I. Miga, Cortical shift tracking using a laser range scanner and deformable registration methods, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2003, pp. 166–174. [12] Y. Xiao, H. Rivaz, M. Chabanas, M. Fortin, I. Machado, Y. Ou, M. P. Heinrich, J. A. Schnabel, X. Zhong, A. Maier, et al., Evaluation of mri to ultrasound registration methods for brain shift correction: the curious2018 challenge, IEEE transactions on medical imaging 39 (2019) 777–786. 34 [13] O. Clatz, H. Delingette, I.-F. Talos, A. J. Golby, R. Kikinis, F. A. Jolesz, N. Ayache, S. K. Warfield, Robust nonrigid registration to capture brain shift from intraoperative mri, IEEE transactions on medical imaging 24 (2005) 1417–1427. [14] H.-A. Leroy, C. Tuleasca, Q. Vannod-Michel, N. Reyns, Intraoperative mri guidance for right deep fronto-temporal glioma resection: how i do it, Acta Neurochirurgica 162 (2020) 3037–3041. [15] S. Bayer, A. Maier, M. Ostermeier, R. Fahrig, Intraoperative imaging modalities and compensation for brain shift in tumor resection surgery, International journal of biomedical imaging 2017 (2017) 6028645. [16] G. Balakrishnan, A. Zhao, M. R. Sabuncu, J. Guttag, A. V. Dalca, Voxelmorph: a learning framework for deformable medical image regis-tration, IEEE transactions on medical imaging 38 (2019) 1788–1800. [17] Y. Fu, Y. Lei, T. Wang, W. J. Curran, T. Liu, X. Yang, Deep learning in medical image registration: a review, Physics in Medicine & Biology 65 (2020) 20TR01. [18] V. Dalca Adrian, B. Guha, G. John, R. Sabuncu Mert, Unsupervised learning for fast probabilistic diffeomorphic registration, 729–738, 2018. [19] B. D. De Vos, F. F. Berendsen, M. A. Viergever, H. Sokooti, M. Star-ing, I. Išgum, A deep learning framework for unsupervised affine and deformable image registration, Medical image analysis 52 (2019) 128– 143. [20] K. Correa-Arana, O. A. Vivas-Albán, J. M. Sabater-Navarro, Neuro-surgery and brain shift: review of the state of the art and main contri-butions of robotics, TecnoLógicas 20 (2017) 125–138. [21] C. Zhang, Y. Dong, Wireless transmission-based brain shift compensa-tion system, The Journal of Engineering 2019 (2019) 506–511. [22] Z. Yang, J. S. Heiselman, C. Han, K. Merrell, R. Simon, C. A. Linte, Resolving the ambiguity of complete-to-partial point cloud registration for image-guided liver surgery with patches-to-partial matching, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics (2025). 35 [23] P. Liu, J. Golde, J. Morgenstern, S. Bodenstedt, C. Li, Y. Hu, Z. Chen, E. Koch, M. Neudert, S. Speidel, Non-rigid point cloud registration for middle ear diagnostics with endoscopic optical coherence tomography, International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery 19 (2024) 139–145. [24] H. Jiang, R. A. Robb, K. S. H. Tainter, New approach to 3-d registration of multimodality medical images by surface matching, in: Visualization in Biomedical Computing’92, volume 1808, SPIE, 1992, pp. 196–213. [25] M. Labrunie, M. Ribeiro, F. Mourthadhoi, C. Tilmant, B. Le Roy, E. Buc, A. Bartoli, Automatic preoperative 3d model registration in laparoscopic liver resection, International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery 17 (2022) 1429–1436. [26] A. Liu, S. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Zhi, X. Li, Ranerf: Neural 3-d recon-struction of space targets from isar image sequences, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 61 (2023) 1–15. [27] Y. Zhang, Y. Zou, P. X. Liu, Point cloud registration in laparoscopic liver surgery using keypoint correspondence registration network, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (2024). [28] P. J. Besl, N. D. McKay, Method for registration of 3-d shapes, in: Sensor fusion IV: control paradigms and data structures, volume 1611, Spie, 1992, pp. 586–606. [29] B. Amberg, S. Romdhani, T. Vetter, Optimal step nonrigid icp algo-rithms for surface registration, in: 2007 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–8. [30] C. R. Qi, H. Su, K. Mo, L. J. Guibas, Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 652–660. [31] C. R. Qi, L. Yi, H. Su, L. J. Guibas, Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017). 36 [32] A. V. Phan, M. Le Nguyen, Y. L. H. Nguyen, L. T. Bui, Dgcnn: Aconvolutional neural network over large-scale labeled graphs, Neural Networks 108 (2018) 533–543. [33] G. Li, M. Muller, A. Thabet, B. Ghanem, Deepgcns: Can gcns go as deep as cnns?, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2019, pp. 9267–9276. [34] Y.-X. Zhang, J. Gui, X. Cong, X. Gong, W. Tao, A comprehensive sur-vey and taxonomy on point cloud registration based on deep learning., in: IJCAI, 2024, pp. 8344–8353. [35] M. I. Miga, A. Staubert, K. D. Paulsen, F. E. Kennedy, V. M. Tronnier, D. W. Roberts, A. Hartov, L. A. Platenik, K. E. Lunn, Model-updated image-guided neurosurgery: Preliminary analysis using intraoperative mr, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2000, pp. 115–124. [36] Y. Aoki, H. Goforth, R. A. Srivatsan, S. Lucey, Pointnetlk: Robust & efficient point cloud registration using pointnet, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 7163–7172. [37] S. Huang, Z. Gojcic, M. Usvyatsov, A. Wieser, K. Schindler, Predator: Registration of 3d point clouds with low overlap, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 4267–4276. [38] P. Henrich, F. Mathis-Ullrich, P. M. Scheikl, Ludo: Low-latency under-standing of deformable objects using point cloud occupancy functions, IEEE Transactions on Robotics (2025). [39] F. Falta, C. Großbröhmer, A. Hering, A. Bigalke, M. Heinrich, Lung250m-4b: a combined 3d dataset for ct-and point cloud-based intra-patient lung registration, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023) 54819–54832. [40] T. D. Prananta, A robotic needle guide for prostate brachytherapy with pre-operative to intra-operative prostate volumes registration, Ph.D. thesis, University of British Columbia, 2010. 37 [41] S. Haker, S. K. Warfield, C. M. Tempany, Landmark-guided surface matching and volumetric warping for improved prostate biopsy targeting and guidance, in: International Conference on Medical Image Comput-ing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2004, pp. 853–861. [42] Y. Fan, X. Yao, X. Xu, A robust automated surface-matching registra-tion method for neuronavigation, Medical physics 47 (2020) 2755–2767. [43] Q. Wang Alan, S. Rachit, K. Heejong, D. A. He, R. Sabuncu Mert, Brainmorph: A foundational keypoint model for robust and flexible brain mri registration, arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14019 (2024). [44] Q. Lin, X. Guo, Y. Xie, K. Peng, R. Yang, K. Cai, Surface matching-based markerless global optimization registration for improved optical surgical systems in internet of things-enabled operating rooms, IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 70 (2024) 939–946. doi: 10.1109/ TCE.2023.3329032 .[45] C. DeLorenzo, X. Papademetris, L. H. Staib, K. P. Vives, D. D. Spencer, J. S. Duncan, Volumetric intraoperative brain deformation compen-sation: Model development and phantom validation, IEEE Transac-tions on Medical Imaging 31 (2012) 1607–1619. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2012. 2197407 .[46] M. Pfeiffer, C. Riediger, J. Weitz, S. Speidel, Learning soft tissue be-havior of organs for surgical navigation with convolutional neural net-works, International journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery 14 (2019) 1147–1155. [47] P. Juvekar, R. Dorent, F. Kögl, E. Torio, C. Barr, L. Rigolo, C. Galvin, N. Jowkar, A. Kazi, N. Haouchine, et al., Remind: The brain resection multimodal imaging database, Scientific Data 11 (2024) 494. [48] A. Fedorov, R. Beichel, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, J. Finet, J.-C. Fillion-Robin, S. Pujol, C. Bauer, D. Jennings, F. Fennessy, M. Sonka, et al., 3d slicer as an image computing platform for the quantitative imaging network, Magnetic Resonance Imaging 30 (2012) 1323–1341. [49] C. Geuzaine, J.-F. Remacle, Gmsh: A 3-d finite element mesh generator with built-in pre- and post-processing facilities, International Journal for 38 Numerical Methods in Engineering 79 (2009) 1309–1331. doi: 10.1002/ nme.2579 .[50] Autodesk Inc., Autodesk meshmixer, https://www.meshmixer.com ,2024. Accessed: 2026-02-18. [51] G. Taubin, Curve and surface smoothing without shrinkage, in: Pro-ceedings of IEEE international conference on computer vision, IEEE, 1995, pp. 852–857. [52] A. Myronenko, X. Song, Point set registration: Coherent point drift, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 32 (2010) 2262–2275. [53] Z. Yang, R. Simon, C. A. Linte, Learning feature descriptors for pre-and intra-operative point cloud matching for laparoscopic liver registra-tion, International journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery 18 (2023) 1025–1032. [54] S. Monji-Azad, M. Kinz, D. Maennel, C. Scherl, J. Hesser, Robust-defreg: a robust coarse to fine non-rigid point cloud registration method based on graph convolutional neural networks, Measurement Science and Technology 36 (2025) 015426. 39