Title: 2603.25945v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25945v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:15:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
1

# Adapting Segment Anything Model 3 for Concept -Driven Lesion Segmentation in 

# Medical Images : An Experimental Study 

Guoping Xu 1, Jayaram K. Udupa 2, Yubing Tong 2, Xin Long 3, Ying Zhang 1, Jie Deng 1, Weiguo Lu 1, You 

Zhang 1#

> 1

The Medical Artificial Intelligence and Automation (MAIA) Laboratory , Department of Radiation 

Oncology , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA 

> 2

Medical Image Processing Group, Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philade lphia, PA 

19104, USA 

> 3

Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 

Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA  

> #

Correspondence: you.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu 

Abstract 

Accurate segmentation of lesions is fundamental to medical image analysis, yet most existing approaches 

are designed for specific anatomical sites and imaging modalities, limiting their applicability in 

heterogeneous clinical environments. Recent vision -language fo undation models have enabled concept -

driven segmentation in natural images, offering a promising path toward more flexible and generalizable 

medical image segmentation. However, to our knowledge, concept -prompt -based lesion segmentation in 

medical images, particularly using the latest Segment Anything Model 3 (SAM3), has not been thoroughly 

examined. 

In this work, we present a systematic investigation of the SAM3 framework for lesion segmentation . We 

first conduct an extensive evaluation of SAM3 using geometric bounding boxes as prompts, as well as 

concept -based text and image exemplars, for lesion segmentation across multiple cancer types and 

imaging modalities, including multiparametric MRI, CT, u ltrasound, dermoscopy , and endoscopic imaging .

To improve robustness and segmentation accuracy, we further explore the integration of additional 

knowledge into the input representation, including the predictions from adjacent slices , the 

multiparametric im aging information , and pr ior annotations . In addition, we provide a comprehensive 

comparison of fine -tuning strategies for SAM3 , encompassing partial module fine -tuning, adapter -based 

optimization, and full -model fine -tuning under different training object ives. 

Extensive experiments conducted on 13 datasets covering 11 lesion types demonstrate that SAM3 

achieves strong cross -modality generalization, robust concept -prompt -based segmentation, and accurate 

instance -specific lesion delineation . These results hi ghlight the potential of concept -driven foundation 

models for scalable and practical medical image segmentation in real -world clinical settings. Code and 

trained models will be made publicly available at https://github.com/apple1986/lesion -sam3 

Keywords: vision -language foundation model, prompt, concept -driven segmentation, medical image 

segmentation , lesion 2

1. Introduction 

Medical image segmentation aims to accurately identify and delineate anatomical structures, tissues, or 

pathological lesions across diverse imaging modalities. It plays a critical role in numerous clinical 

applications, including diagnosis, treatment plann ing, disease monitoring, and quantitative assessment of 

pathological changes [1, 2] . In recent years, the rapid development of deep learning has led to substantial 

performance improvements in medical image segmentation, enabling increasingly accurate and 

automated analysis of complex medical imaging data. 

Generally, existing deep learnin g-based medical image segmentation methods have adopted different 

strategies to improve the segmentation accuracy and robustness: (1) Multi -scale feature representation: 

this strategy is widely adopted to handle large variations in object size and is typic ally achieved through 

skip connections (e.g., U-Net [3] and UNet++ [4] ), enlarged receptive fields via dilated convolutions or large 

kernels (e.g., the DeepLab series [5, 6] and SegNeXt [7] ), or hierarchical feature pyramids construct ed 

using pooling or strided convolutions (e.g., PSPNet [8] and UPerNet [9] ); (2) Local and global feature fusion: 

hybrid architectures that combine convolutional neural networks with Transformer -based modules have 

been proposed to jointly capture fine -grained local details and long -range contextual dependencies, as 

exemplified by TransUNet [10] , LeViT -UNet [11] , and Swin -UNet [12] ; (3) Prior -knowledge enhancement: 

prior -knowledge integration has been explored to further improve segmentation performance, including 

extending 2D slice -based segmentation to 3D volume -based frameworks to exploit spatial continuity and 

shape information (e. g., UNETR [13] and UNETR++ [14] ), employing advanced data augmentation 

strategies [15] , and introducing deep supervision by injecting label information at multiple stages of the 

decoder [16] ; and (4) other complementary approaches: additional methods investigate novel loss 

functions [17] , uncertainty modeling [18] , semi -supervised learning [19] , and related techniqu es to further 

enhance robustness and generalization in challenging clinical scenarios. 

While these approaches or techniques demonstrate impressive segmentation performance, they are 

often tailored to specific anatomical structures within a fixed body region (e.g., brain, thorax, or abdomen) 

and a single imaging modality , like MR or CT . Consequently, such models typically requi re retraining or 

extensive fine -tuning when applied to different anatomical sites or imaging modalities. As a result, they 

often struggle to generalize effectively across the diverse and heterogeneous clinical environments 

encountered in real -world medical practice [20] . Driven by the remarkable success of large language 

models (LLMs), recent research has highlighted the effectiveness of scaling laws, wherein training 

Transformer -based architectures with billions of parameters on massive datasets leads to substantial 

improvements in generalization and task adaptab ility [21, 22] . Inspired by these advances, large -scale 

vision foundation models have been actively investigated by leveraging unprecedented amounts of 

training data, increased model capacity, and novel training strategies to learn more discriminative visual 

representations [23, 24] .

In the context of image segmentation, vision foundation models aim to provide a unified and transferable 

framework capable of adapting to diverse segmentation tasks with high generalization ability and 

robustness in real -world scenarios. A representative example is the Segment Anything Model (SAM) 

introduced in 2023 [25] . Trained on a large -scale dataset comprising 11 million images and over 1 billion 

masks, SAM demonstrates remarkable generalization capability and strong segmentation performance on 

natural images under a prompt -based segmentation paradigm. Building upon its architecture, subsequent 3

studies have extended SAM to the medical imaging domain through large -scale medical image pretraining, 

including MedSAM for 2D medical image segmentation [26] and SAM -Med3D for volumetric data [27] . In 

2024, its successor, SAM2, was proposed [28] , which extends promptable segmentation from static 

images to videos. By incorporating streaming memory modules to leverage features and predictions from 

previous frames, SAM2 enables efficient and real -time multi -object video segmentation using simple 

geo metric prompts, such as points, bounding boxes, or scribble masks. Further studies, including DD -

SAM2 [29] and TSMS -SAM2 [30] , fine -tuned SAM2 on medical video datasets and demonstrated its strong 

performance in various clinical scenarios. 

Despite these advances, existing SAM -based segmentation approaches remain limited to visual -prompt -

driven interaction and cannot segment object instances using a concept -level prompt , like text (short 

phrase) or an image exemplar . In other words, these interactive models require users to manually provide 

geometric prompts (e.g., points or bounding boxes) for each target instance on an image, which becomes 

inefficient or impractical in scenarios involving multiple instances. When multiple instances of the same 

kind of object appear in a single image, geometric prompts must be provided individually for each instance. 

To address this limitation, SAM3 [31] was proposed, which not only retains compatibility with visual 

prompts as in SAM and SAM2, but enables concept -based segmentation, allowing all instances 

corr esponding to a given concept prompt , which is specified by text or an image exemplar , t o be 

segmented simultaneously ( see Fig. 1 for an illustrative comparison between geometric -based and 

concept -based prompting in SAM3 . Note that geometric -based prompts yield a single tumor 

segmentation per prompt, whereas concept -based prompting enables simultaneous segmentation of all 

relevant t umor regions ). 4

Figure 1. Comparison of geometric -based and concept -based prompts in SAM3. The first row shows a 

T1 -weighted contrast -enhanced MRI slice , its tumor annotation (3 lesions) , tumor boundary overlay , and 

tumor mask overlay. The second row pres ents geometr y-based prompting using point prompts (positive 

in yellow, negative in red) or a bounding -box prompt, together with the corresponding segmentation 

results. The third row illustrates concept -based segmentation using either a text prompt (“lesion ”) or an 

image exemplar (green bounding box) and the resulting prediction masks. Geometr y-based prompts 

yield a single tumor prediction per prompt, whereas concept -based prompting enables simultaneous 

segmentation of all relevant lesion regions. 

Recent stu dies have begun to explore the potential and limitations of SAM3 by analyzing its architectural 

and functional advantages compared with SAM2 . Specifically, the work in [32] investigates the 

fundamental differences between SAM2 and SAM3 on natural images , aiming to elucidate why SAM2 fails 

in concept -driven image segmentation. This analysis spans multiple aspects, including network 

architecture, objective functions, prompt types, training datasets, and evaluation metrics. In [33] , SAM2 

and SAM3 are further compared for zero -shot segmentation of 3D medical images, with the evaluation 

res tricted to purely geometric prompts and the concept -based mechanism explicitly disabled. The results 

demonstrate that SAM3 consistently outperforms SAM2 across most medical segmentation tasks, 5

particularly in scenarios involving sparse user annotation or c omplex anatomical topology . However, the 

potential of SAM3 for lesion segmentation remains insufficiently explored. Additionally, t o improve the 

domain adaptation capability , SAM3 -Adapter introduces lightweight adapter modules into the vision 

encoder block s and fine -tunes both the adapter sets and the mask decoder of SAM3, resulting in improved 

segmentation accuracy, robustness, and training efficiency compared with prior SAM -based adaptation 

strategies [34] . Concurrently, MedSAM3 [35] extends SAM3 to medical image and video segmentation by 

leveraging open -vocabulary medical concepts as textual prompts. This approa ch fine -tunes the detector 

components while freezing the image and text encoders of the original SAM3 architecture, using paired 

medical images and corresponding labels. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of this 

strategy in adapting SAM3 t o medical imaging tasks. 

Although a series of studies have been conducted on SAM3 , including performance comparisons with 

SAM2 and fine -tuning using adapters , several important questions remain insufficiently explored in the 

context of concept -prompt -based (text and/or image exemplars) medical image segmentation: (1) how 

well SAM3 generalizes to tumor or lesion 1 segmentation across different anatomical regions, given the 

substantial variations in anatomical structures, imaging modalities, data distrib utions, and shape 

characteristics (as illustrated in Fig. 2); (2) whether integrating prior /additional knowledge ( e.g., 

prediction results from adjacent slices or multi -modality imaging concatenation ) into the input can 

effectively improve segmentation per formance; and (3) how to fine -tune SAM3 in an effective and 

efficient manner for tumor/lesion segmentation in medical images. This study seeks to address these 

three questions by focusing on lesion segmentation across multiple anatomical regions , prior -kno wledge -

enhanced input representations , and fine -tuning strategies for SAM3 under concept prompts .

The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows: 

(1) We systematically evaluate SAM3 for tumor/lesion segmentation across multiple anatomical r egions 

(brain, lung, liver, pancreas, kidney , skin , etc. ) using concept -level prompts on multiparametric MRI, CT ,

ultrasound, dermoscopy , and endoscopy images (see Fig. 2 for illustration ).

(2) We investigate the impact of integrating prior /additional knowledge into SAM3 , including the use of 

adjacent prediction masks, multi -modality image fusion , and prior annotations .

(3) We conduct a comprehensive comparison of different fine -tuning strategies for SAM3, including partial 

module fine -tuni ng, adapter -based fine -tuning, and full model fine -tuning, under various optimization 

objectives.   

> 1In this study, we adopt the term “lesion” to denote a broad category of abnormal tissue regions, including tumors,
> polyps, ischemic stroke lesions, and other pathological findings across different organs , tissue regions, and
> conceptual regions like lymph node zones.

6

Figure 2. Representative examples of tumor and lesion segmentation overlays across multiple medical 

imaging modalities across diverse anatomical regions. In this study, we focus on the systematic 

evaluation of a single model’s capability to segment heterogeneous les ion types across varied clinical 

scenarios . The human anatomy illustration is based on a free graphic obtained from Vecteezy.com and 

was further modified using ChatGPT (https://chatgpt.com/) to enhance visualization. 

2. Related work 

(1). Lesion Segmentati on in Medical Image s

Lesion segmentation plays a pivotal role in clinical diagnosis, treatment planning, and disease monitoring. 

Compared with anatomical structure segmentation, lesion segmentation is considerably more challenging 

due to the large variabil ity in lesion size, shape, appearance, and location, as well as the often low contrast 

between lesions and surrounding tissues or organs [36, 37] . These factors significantly complicate robust 

and generalizable model design across different clinical scenarios. rain etastasis     

> iver umor ung umor
> ancreas umor

idney umor    

> olorectal olyp
> rain umor
> olon umor

7

Over the past decade, substantial progress has been achieved in lesion segmentation, driven primarily by 

two key factors. First , a growing number of large -scale, publicly available datasets ha ve been curated and 

released, largely through community efforts and grand challenges. Representative examples include the 

Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation (BraTS) benchmark, which has evolved from early editions with a 

limited number of cases to BraTS 2 023 [38] , comprising 1,4 24 expertly annotated subjects. Similar efforts 

include the Kidney Tumor Segmentation ( KiTS ) dataset for kidney tumor s [39] , the liver tumor 

segmentation (LiTS) dataset for liver tumor s [40] , and the Medical Segmentation Decathlon (MSD), which 

provides ten diverse organ and tumor segmentation tasks. In addition, modality -specific datasets such as 

BUSI [4 1] , ISIC2018 [42] , and Kvasir -SEG [43] have further advanced research in breast tumor, skin lesion, 

and polyp segmentation, respectively. Second , significant methodological advances have been enabled by 

deep learning -based segmentation frameworks. Convolutional neural network architectures, pa rticularly 

encoder -decoder designs such as the U-Net [3] and its variants [36, 44] , have become the dominant 

paradigm due to their strong representation capacity and efficiency. More recent approaches have 

incorporated attention mechanisms, Transformer -based modules, and hybrid CNN -Transformer 

architect ures to better capture long -range dependencies and contextual information , such as TransUNet 

[10] , UNETR ++ [13] , and Mask 2Former [45, 46] . Despite their success, these methods are typically trained 

for specific lesion types, anatomical regions, and imaging modalities, limiting their generalization ability 

in heterogeneous clinical environments and often requiring task -specific retraining or extensive fine -

tuning. 

Motivated by these limitations, recent research has shif ted toward foundation models and prompt -driven 

segmentation frameworks that aim to provide more generalizable and flexible solutions , such as MedSAM 

[26] , LeSAM [47] and Medical SAM2 [48] . Nevertheless, existing SAM -based approaches rely heavi ly on 

geometric prompts for each target object and exhibit limited generalization capability for lesion 

segmentation across multiple imaging modalities and whole -body anatomical regions. In this study, we 

propose to leverage SAM3 to enabl e robust , concept -driven lesion segmentation across diverse organs, 

imaging modalities, and clinical scenarios. By doing so, our approach aims to bridge the gap between task -

specific segmentation models and practical, scalable clinical deployment. 

(2) . Concept -based Segmentation 

With the rapid advancement of large language models, increasing attention has been devoted to learning 

joint representations that align language and visual modalities. A seminal contribution in this direction is 

Contrastive Lan guage -Image Pre -training (CLIP), which learns semantically interpretable visual 

representations (visual grounding) through large -scale text supervision, enabling natural language to be 

mapped to visual concepts [49] . Building upon this paradigm, Grounding DINO [50] unifies open -set object 

detection with grounded pre -tra ining and supports free -form textual prompts as input. Further extending 

this framework, DINO -X [51] integrates multiple perception heads to jointly support object detection, 

instance segmentation, and object captioning within a unified architecture. 

SAM3 adopts pre -trained text and vision enco ders from the Perception Encoder (PE) [52] and combines 

them with a DETR -style detection head and mask decoder for instance -level segmentation. In addition, 

similar to SAM2, SAM3 incorporates a tracker with a memory bank to enable object tracking and temporal 

mask propaga tion. Leveraging its text encoder and prompt encoder, SAM3 supports concept -driven 

segmentation, allowing all object instances corresponding to a given textual description or image 

exemplar to be segmented simultaneously. In this work, we extend this capab ility to the more challenging 8

problem of lesion segmentation across multi -modality medical images, encompassing diverse anatomical 

regions at the whole -body level. 

(3) . Fine -tune strategies for foundation models 

Training a foundation medical model from scr atch is not only computationally expensive , which requir es 

substantial computational resources , but also highly challenging due to the time -consuming nature of 

collecting and annotating large -scale medical images across multiple modalities , demanding signi ficant 

domain knowledge. To address these challenges, parameter -efficient fine -tuning (PEFT) methods have 

been proposed [53] .

In general, PEFT approaches can be broadly categorized into two types based on whether additional 

parameters are introduced into the foundation model: parameter -selection methods and parameter -

addition metho ds. Representative examples of the former include FishMask [54] and BitFit [55] , while the 

latter encompasses adapter -based methods [56] and low -rank ada ptation (LoRA) techniques [57] . Building 

upon the parameter -addition strategies, a series of adapter -based approaches have been developed for 

fine -tuning SAM -based models, such as SAM2 -Adapter [58] , 3DSAM -Adapter [59] , and DD -SAM2 [29] . In 

this study, we evaluate different fine -tuning strategies for SAM3 on their effectiveness in medical image 

lesion segmentation tasks. 

3. Methodology 

3.1 . Model Overview 

SAM3 is designed to support not only geometric prompt -based segmentation (e.g., points, bounding 

boxes, or masks), as in SAM and SAM2, but also concept prompt -based segmentation using noun phrases 

or image exemplars. It adopts a dual encoder -decoder Transformer architecture, in which two encoders 

independently process visual and textual input s, while two specialized Transformer -based decoders are 

employed for object localization and pixel -wise segmentation, respectively (see Fig. 3 for an illustration). 9

Figure 3. Overview of the SAM3 architecture. The model primarily adopts a dual encoder -de coder 

Transformer framework coupled with a tracker. Specifically, the Text Encoder and Image Encoder 

comprise approximately 450M and 300M parameters, respectively, while the Detector and Tracker 

together account for about 100M parameters. In this study, we focus on concept -based, image -level 

tumor segmentation; therefore, all object tracking components are disabled, as indicated in blue in the 

figure. For clarity, several skip connections , such as those linking the visual features from the image 

encoder to the pixel decoder and the text features from the text encoder to the detector decoder , are 

omitted to emphasize the core structure of SAM3. 

Specifically, SAM3 mainly comprises an image encoder, a text encoder, a vision -language feature fusion 

module 2 , a pixel decoder, and an object detection decoder for image -level , concept prompt -based 

segmentation. In addition, following SAM2, it is coupled with a tracker and a memory bank to support 

video object segmentation and tracking (In this study, we disable the video tracking functionality and 

focus exclusively on image -level segmentation ). The image encoder and text encoder are inherited from 

the Perception Encoder backbone [52] to extract image and text embeddings, respectively. The pixel 

decoder generates dense pixel -level f eatures for semantic mask prediction, whereas the object detection 

decoder follows a DETR -style design [60] , aiming to search for, localize, and identify object instan ces via 

learnable detector queries and a presence token. This architecture explicitly decouples detection, 

segmentation, and tracking objectives, thereby enabling robust concept -driven and multi -instance 

segmentation.     

> 2In the original SAM3 supplementary material, the module responsible for fusing visual and textual features is
> referred to as the Multimodal Decoder. In this work, we adopt the term vision -language fusion module (V -L Feature
> Fusion) to maintain consistency with the dual encoder -decoder nomenclature used throughout the paper and to
> better emphasize its architectural role and functional purpose within the dual encoder -decoder framework.

# ext 

# ncoder 

# Image 

# ncoder 

# eature 

# usion ixel 

# ecoder 

# etector 

# ecoder 

# rac er 

# emory 

# an 

## xemplar 

## ncoder 

## Instance 

## as ead 

## eman c 

## eg ead 

## as let 

## atcher 

# emory 

# an 

# emory 

# en on point , box or mas  

> per ob ect memory ban

## eman c as 

## utput 

# etector 

> exemplar

## a tumor 

## utput for frames 10 

3.2 . Concept -prompt –based segmentation 

In this study, we focus on concept -based , image -level lesion segmentation, following a novel Promptable 

Concept Segmentation (PCS) paradigm, in which either text or image exemplars are provided as prompts. 

This contrasts with the Promptable Visual Segmentation (PVS) approach (geometric prompts) e mployed 

by SAM and SAM2, although SAM3 also supports PVS segmentation. For text -based prompts, we enable 

the use of text descriptions to specify the instances to be segmented according to a given concept 

(“lesions ”). The model employs a pre -trained text en coder to extract text embeddings, which are then fed 

into the vision -language feature fusion module and the detector decoder, facilitating instance recognition 

and localization. 

In addition, SAM3 supports image exemplars as concept prompts. For example, gi ven a bounding box and 

a positive binary label (exemplar in Fig . 3), the model is informed about the target instance to segment. 

The exemplar encoder processes the geometric information, label class (positive or negative) , and the 

region -of -interest (RoI) -pooled visual features extracted by the image encoder. The detector then 

integrates these exemplar features to match and identify all instances corresponding to the concept (e.g., 

the three tumors in Fig . 2), in contrast to geometric prompts used in PVS , w here each prompt corresponds 

to only a single segmented object. Furthermore, if text and image exemplars are provided simultaneously, 

SAM3 can concatenate the text embeddings with the exemplar feature embeddings to generate unified 

prompt tokens. 

3.3 . Prior knowledge enhancement for input 

(1) Enhancement from Preceding Prediction Masks 

For volumetric medical images, lesions typically extend across multiple adjacent slices. Exploiting this 

spatial continuity as prior knowledge, we propose a simple yet effective strategy to integrate information 

from preceding predictions into the current inference step. Specifically, the prediction mask from the 

preceding slice is concatenated with the current slice and provided as an additional input channel to the 

mo del. This strategy supplies coarse localization cues for the current slice. Importantly, the design of 

presence tokens and learnable detector queries in the object detection decoder enables SAM3 to 

distinguish whether a lesion exists at the location sugges ted by the preceding prediction and to accurately 

match the corresponding region in the current slice when present. As a result, the model can robustly 

leverage prior contextual information while avoiding error propagation across slices. 

The overall infere nce procedure can be summarized in the following pseudo code :

def prior_enhance d_inference(img_vol, prompt, SAM3): 

""" 

Prior -enhanced slice -wise inference for volumetric lesion segmentation. 

Args: 

img_vol: Tensor of shape [1, N, H, W], input image volume 

SAM3: Trained SAM3 model 

Returns: 

pred_vol: Tensor of shape [1, N, H, W], predicted segmentation volume 

""" 11 

# Initialize prediction volume 

pred_vol = torch.zeros_like(img_vol) 

for n in range(im g_vol.shape[1]): 

# Extract current slice: [1, 1, H, W] 

current_slice = img_vol[:, n, :, :].unsqueeze(1) 

if n == 0: 

# No prior mask available for the first slice 

pre ceding _mask = torch.zeros_like(current_slice) 

model_input = torch.cat( 

(current_slice, current_slice, current_slice), dim=1 

)

else: 

# Concatenate pre ceding prediction as prior knowledge 

model_input = torch.cat( 

(current_slice, current_slice, pre ceding _mask), dim=1 

)

# Run SAM3 inference 

pred_mask = SAM3(model_input , prompt )

# Store prediction and update prior 

pred_vol[:, n, :, :] = pred_ma sk.squeeze(1) 

pre ceding _mask = pred_mask 

return pred_vol 

(2) Multimodal Integration as Model Inputs 

Multi -modality imaging offers complementary anatomical and functional information that can facilitate 

more reliable lesion delineation. We therefore explore a multi -modality integration strategy in which 

images from different modalities are concatenated as multi -channel inputs to SAM3. This input -level 

fusion enables the model to exploit cross -modal contrast and structural correlations, potentially 

improving robustness to appearance variability and ambiguous boundaries. 

(3) Enhancement from Previous Image s and A nnotations 

In treatment regimens like adaptive radiation therapy (ART) [61] , prior treatment images and their 

corresponding annotations provide valuable contextual information regarding lesion location and 

morphology. To exploit this prior knowledge, we incorporate historical annotations and the corresponding 

MR by concatenating them with the current MR image along the channel dimension. Specifically, for each 

treatment fraction, the MR image and tumor annotation from the immediately preceding treatment 

fraction are used as auxiliary inputs to guide the segmenta tion of the current fraction. Leveraging the 

most recent prior enables the model to capture relevant anatomical and morphological characteristics, 12 

which is particularly important when tumor geometry evolves across fractions. This strategy offers coarse 

spa tial guidance that facilitates lesion localization and improves segmentation accuracy. Similar to Sec. 

2.3 .1 , the previous MR image and its corresponding segmentation mask are concatenated with the current 

MR image as input, allowing the model to directly exploit prior spatial information for tumor detection 

and delineation. The three prior -based enhancements in Sec. 2.3 are evaluated separately without joint 

evaluation, to better characterize each strategy’s impact on the segmentation accuracy. 

3.4. Strat egies for Fine -Tuning SAM3 

For concept -based image -level segmentation, SAM3 involves three core components: the image encoder, 

the text encoder, and the detector module, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (highlighted in green and yellow) . In this 

study, we investigate three fine -tuning strategies to adapt SAM3 for lesion segmentation in medical 

images, namely full fine -tuning, partial fine -tuning, and adapter -based fine -tuning, as summarized in 

Table 1 . Note that all tracking -related modules are disabled, as our focus is on image -level segmentation 

rather than video object tracking and segmentation. 

Table 1. Three fine -tuning strategies for SAM3. 

Mode  Fine -tuning 

Module  Description 

Full fine -

tuning 

Image encoder, 

text encoder , and 

detector 

End -to -end fine -tuning of all SAM3 components (excluding the 

tracker ).

Partial fine -

tuning  Detector  Fine -tuning the entire detector module while freezing the 

image and text encoders. 

Adapter -

based fine -

tuning 

Adapters in the 

image encoder 

Parameter -efficient fine -tuning via lightweight adapter 

modules inserted into the image encoder , while freezing the 

original image encoder , the text encoder , and the detector .

For the full fine -tuning mode (see Fig . 4 (a) ), all parameters of the image encoder, the text encoder, and 

the detector are updated during training. To supervise concept -level pixel predictions without relying on 

explicit instance matching, two pixel -wise semantic segm entation losses (focal loss and Dice loss ) are 

employed. This design enables effective promptable concept segmentation under pixel -level mask 

supervision. In addition, a detection objective incorporates multiple instance -level loss terms, including 

cross -entropy loss for query -level classification, alignment loss, and instance -level mask loss, which 

enforces accurate spatial alignment between predicted masks and matched ground -truth instances. 

Together, this dual -level optimization strategy allows SAM3 to j ointly model concept presence, spatial 

extent, and instance specificity, thereby supporting robust and precise lesion segmentation. 13 

Figure 4. (a) Full, (b) partial, and (c) adapter -based fine -tuning strategies. 

For partial module fine -tuning (Fig. 4 (b)), both the text encoder and image encoder are frozen, and only 

the detector is fine -tuned. This configuration aims to preserve the general representation capability 

learned from large -scale pre -training while adapting the task -specific detection head to lesion 

segmentation. By limiting the number of trainable parameters, this strategy also reduces the risk of 

overfitting and lowers computational and memory costs. However, freezing the encoders constrains the 

model’s ability to adapt to domain -specific app earance variations in medical images, which may limit 

performance gains. Therefore, we adopt an adapter -based fine -tuning approach (see Fig. 4 (c) ) as another 

configuration for adapting SAM3. Following the pipeline of DD -SAM2 [29] , adapter modules are inserted 

into the blocks of the image encoder. During training, only the parameters of adapter module s are 

updated, enabling parameter -efficient adaptation while preserving the pretrained backbone weights. For 

finetuned SAM3, when fine -tuning either all parameters or only the detector module, the learning rate 

was set to 1e -5, the model was trained for 10 epochs, and the AdamW optimizer was used. The final model 

was selected based on the highest Dice score on the validation set. For adapter -based fine -tuning, the 

learning rate was increased to 5e -5, and 12 adapter modules were inserted into the 20 th to 31 st blocks of 

the image encoder. All other training settings remained identical to those described above. 

4. Experiment al Results 

4.1 Datasets 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of SAM3 across diverse medical imaging modalities, we 

curated 13 lesion segmentation datasets spanning MRI, CT, dermoscopy, endoscopy, and ultrasound 

images. These datasets cover a wide range of anatomical regions, including the brain, thorax, abdomen, 

and skin, and encompass various pathological targets , including brain tumors, lung tumors, liver tumors, 

pancreatic tumors, kidney tumors, ischemic stroke lesions, skin lesions, and others. A detailed summary 

of the datasets, imaging modalities, target objects, and data splits (for BraTS2023 -MET only) is provided 

in Table 2 . For evaluations using a single modality as input, T1 -contrast (T1 -C) images from BraTS2023 -

MET and DWI from ISLSE22 are used as the input . For the Mix -Seq -Brain and Mix -Seq -Abdomen datasets, 

the input imaging modality is randomly selected for each case to evaluate the model’s generalization 

capability across multi -parametric MRI sequences. 

Table 2. Summary of the medical datasets used for lesion segmentation .

Dataset  Modality  Target Objects  Train  Val  Test ext    

> ncoder
> Image
> ncoder
> etector
> ext rompt
> Image Input
> utput
> ext
> ncoder
> Image
> ncoder
> etector
> ext rompt
> Image Input
> utput
> ext
> ncoder
> Image
> ncoder
> etector
> ext rompt
> Image Input
> utput
> reeze
> inetune
> dapters

14 

BraTS2023 -

MET  T1 -C, T1 -W, T2 -FLAIR , T2 -W Brain metastasis  85  80  73

ISLSE22  DWI, ADC  Ischemic stroke 

lesion  - - 125 

MSD Lung  CT  Lung tumor  - - 30 

MSD Liver  CT  Liver tumor  - - 60 

MSD Pancreas  CT  Pancreas tumor  - - 180 

MSD Colon  CT  Colon tumor  - - 66 

KiTS2019  CT  Kidney tumor  - - 200 

ISIC2018  Dermoscopy  Skin lesion  - - 1520 

Kvasir -SEG  Endoscopy  Polyp  - - 320 

BUSI  Ultrasound  Breast tumor  - - 300 

Mix -Seq -Brain  T1 -C, T1 -W, T2 -FLAIR , T2 -W Brain tumo r - - 86 

One -Seq -Liver  T2 -MVXD  Liver tumor  - - 115 

Mix -Seq -

Abdomen 

T2 -MVXD, T2 -MVXD -SPIR, T1 -

3DVaneXD, and T2 -FS  Abdomen tumor  - - 88 

(1) BraTS2023 -MET [62] . Brain metastases represent the most common malignant tumors of the adult 

central nervous system and arise from primary cancers located elsewhere in the body. BraTS2023 -MET is 

a subtask of the BraTS2023 challenge, designed to segm ent brain metastases using multi -modal MRI, 

including T1 -contrast -enhanced (T1 -C), T1 -weighted (T1 -W), T2 -FLAIR (T2 -F), and T2 -weighted (T2 -W) 

images. In this study, we focus on enhancing tumor segmentation and partition the 23 8 annotated cases 

into 85 tra ining, 80 validation, and 7 3 testing subjects. 

(2) ISLSE22 [63] . IS LES22 is a multi -center brain MRI dataset developed to benchmark segmentation 

algorithms for acute to subacute ischemic stroke lesions. The dataset exhibits substantial variability in 

lesion size and appearance across diffusion -weighted imaging (DWI), appa rent diffusion coefficient (ADC), 

and FLAIR sequences. We use 125 3D cases, including DWI and ADC volumes with corresponding reference 

lesion labels, for testing .

(3) MSD Lung [64] . The MSD Lung dataset is a subset of the Med ical Segmentation Decathlon (MSD) and 

consists of 3D CT volumes acquired from patients with non -small cell lung cancer. The task focuses on the 

segmentation of relatively small lung tumors. In our experiments, we use 30 testing samples. 

(4) MSD Liver [64] . The MSD Liver dataset contains contrast -enhanced CT scans with annotations for liver 

tumors. In this work, we employ 60 publicly available annotated cases for testing .

(5) MSD Pancreas [64] . The MSD Pancreas dataset comprises CT scans from patients undergoing surgical 

resection for pancreatic masses. The dataset poses a challenging segmentation problem due to severe 

class imbalance among background, pancreas, and tumor regions. We utilize 180 testing samples , focusing 

exclusively on pancreatic tumor segmentation. 

(6) MSD Colon [64] . The MSD Colon dataset is another subset of the Medical Segmentation Decathlon and 

focuses on colon cancer segmentation from contrast -enhanced CT images. The dataset includes 

volumetric scans with pixel -wise annotations of colon tumors, which exhibit considerable variability in 

size, shape, and location. We employ 66 CT volumes in our experiments for testing .15 

(7) KiTS2019 [39] . The Kidney Tumor Segmentation 2019 ( KiTS2019 ) dataset consists of contrast -

enhanced CT scans, with expert annotations of renal tumors. 200 annotated scans are used in this study 

as testing cases. 

(8) ISIC2018 [42] . The ISIC2018 dataset is part of the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) 

Challenge for benchmarking skin lesion segmentation algorithms. It consists of dermoscopic images with 

expert -annotated lesion masks. In this study , 1,520 testing images are used .

(9) Kvasir -SEG [43] . Kvasir -SEG contains endoscopic images of colorectal polyps, each accompanied by 

pixel -wise ground -truth annotations. In this study, 320 testing samples are used .

(10) BUSI [41] . The Breast Ultrasou nd Images Dataset (BUSI) comprises ultrasound images categorized 

into normal (133), benign (437), and malignant (210) cases. As normal images do not contain lesion 

annotations, they are excluded from this study. 300 lesion -bearing images are used as testin g samples. 

(1 1) Mix -Seq -Brain . The in -house Mix -Seq -Brain dataset consists of 86 MRI scans collected from 37 

patients with brain tumors treated by a 1.5 T MR -LINAC system (Unity, Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden) ,

with 1 -5 adaptive fractions per patient. The dataset includes multiple T1 - and T2 -weighted MRI sequences, 

such as T2 -FLAIR, T1 -weighted, and contrast -enhanced T1 -weighted imaging. In total, 97 clinical target 

volumes (CTVs) were manually delineated by expert radiation oncologists. More d etails can be found in 

[65] .

(1 2) One -Seq -Liver . The in -house One -Seq -Li ver dataset consists of 115 MRI scans acquired from 31 

patients diagnosed with liver tumors , all obtained using a consistent T2 -weighted MultiVane eXtended 

Dynamic (T2 -MVXD) sequence. All patients were treated on a 1.5 T MR -LINAC system, with 1 -7 adaptive 

fractions per patient [53] . In total, 167 internal target volumes (ITVs) were manually delineated by 

experienced radiation oncologists during routine clinical practice. 

(1 3) Mix -Seq -Abdomen . The in -house Mix -Seq -Abdomen dataset comprises 88 fractional MRI scans from 

28 MR -LINAC patients with abdominal malignancies, including liver, pancreatic, and renal tumors. 

Multiple MRI sequences were employed across different treatment fractions, including T2 -MVXD, T2 -

MVXD with fat suppression (T2 -MVXD -SPIR), T1 -weighted 3D Vane XD (T1 -3D -VaneXD), and T2 -weighted 

fat -suppressed turbo spin echo (T2 -FS) imaging. Each patient underwent 2 -6 adaptive fractions. A total of 

156 ITVs were manually annotated by radiation oncologists for this cohort. 

4.2 Direct Evaluation without Fine -Tuning 

(1) Comparison between SAM2 and SAM3 using bounding box es as geometric prompt s

To compare the lesion segmentation performance of SAM2 and SAM3 using bounding box (bbox) -based 

geometric prompts, we extracted tight bounding boxes directly from the ground -truth masks for each 

lesion on every image sl ice. Specifically, each bounding box was defined by the top, bottom, left, and right 

boundaries of the corresponding ground -truth lesion mask. Although this strategy is less practical in real 

clinical workflows by requiring precise, slice -by -slice bounding box annotations , it sets a fair reference for 

model performance comparison. Table 3 summarizes the segmentation results in terms of DICE, 95th -

percentile Hausdorff distance (HD95), and average surface distance (ASD) across all 13 evaluated datasets. 16 

These results reflect the optimal performance achievable by SAM2 and SAM3 when guided by tight 

bounding box prompts. 

As shown in Table 3 , SAM3 outperforms SAM2 on 1 0 of the 13 lesion -related datasets in terms of DICE. 

Notably, SAM3 achieves substantial performance gains on ISLES22 (+4.41% , in absolute terms of DICE ,

same in the following ), MSD Pancreas (+3.04%), and ISIC2018 (+5.39%). In contrast, SAM2 exhibits 

marginal advantages on BraTS2023 -MET, MSD Lung, and BUSI, with Dice improvements <1%. Overall, 

these results indicate that SAM3 demonstrates superior lesion segmentation capability compared to 

SAM2 when evaluated under conventional geometric prompting conditions. 

Table 3. Comparison of segmentation performance between SAM2 and SAM3 , usi ng bounding box 

prompt s for every lesion across multiple medical datasets. ( indicates higher is better;  indicates 

lower is better. The same notation is used in the following tables .)

Dataset  Method  DICE (%)  HD95 ( vo xel ) ASD ( vo xel )

BraTS2023 -MET  SAM2  88.52  2.18  0.65 

SAM3  87.92  1.45  0.54 

ISLSE22  SAM2  81.26  1.54  0.35 

SAM3  85.67  1.15  0.31 

MSD Lung  SAM2  87.01  2.35  0.63 

SAM3  86.90  2.38  0.64 

MSD Liver  SAM2  84.37  4.21  1.33 

SAM3  86.04  3.24  1.03 

MSD Pancreas  SAM2  83.88  10.12  2.39 

SAM3  86.92  6.13  1.46 

MSD Colon  SAM2  82.52  2.98  0.69 

SAM3  83.89  2.96  0.6 0

KiTS2019  SAM2  90.23  4.00  1.1 0

SAM3  91.94  3.02  0.77 

ISIC2018  SAM2  85.43  246.11  95 .00 

SAM 3 90.82  119.78  46.25 

Kvasir -SEG  SAM2  94.33  27.78  8.66 

SAM3  94.52  21.82  7.22 

BUSI  SAM2  87.49  25.94  9.16 

SAM3  87.41  26.79  9.92 

Mix -Seq -Brain  SAM2  76.15  17.05  4.65 

SAM3  77.56  8.45  2.74 

One -Seq -Liver  SAM2  82.19  4.11  1.17 

SAM3  83.28  3.9 0 1.06 

Mix -Seq -Abdomen  SAM2  83.96  3.51  1.02 

SAM3  85.62  3.07  0.87 

(2) Performance comparison between concept -based prompt s for SAM3 

In this setting, we evaluate the performance of SAM3 under concept -based prompting. Specifically, we 

compare three prompting strategies: pure text (T), single image exemplar (E), and a combinati on of text 

and image exemplar ( ). or simplicity and consistency across datasets, the word “lesion” is used as the 17 

text prompt in all experiments. For the image exemplar, a tight bounding box of a lesion is randomly 

selected from a slice and provided to SAM3 as a visual prompt , guiding the model to identify all similar 

lesions present on the slice. This image exemplar serves as a reference example of the target concept 

rather than specifying a particular lesion instance. Table 4 summarizes the segmentation performance 

under the three concept -based prompting strategies in terms of DICE , HD95 , and ASD .

Table 4. Segmentation performance of SAM3 using concept -based prompts for volume medical datasets: 

text (T), image exemplar (E) , and combined text and image exemplar (T+E). 

Dataset  Prompt  DICE (%)  HD95 (vo xel ) ASD (vo xel )

BraTS2023 -MET 

T 0.69  nan  inf 

E 74.39  12.96  4.68 

T + E  77.29  4.24  1.06 

ISLSE22 -DWI 

T 42.46  nan  inf 

E 68.44  7.29  1.96 

T + E  64.94  6.27  1.55 

MSD Lung 

T 62.36  nan  inf 

E 83.90  29.34  9.63 

T + E  86.97  2.28  0.76 

MSD Liver 

T 23.95  nan  inf 

E 75.91  24.5  9.84 

T + E  77.45  6.29  1.84 

MSD Pancreas 

T 3.96  nan  inf 

E 82.25  23.87  7.17 

T+E  84.97  4.74  1.31 

MSD Colon 

T 9.17  nan  inf 

E 81.87  18.88  6.39 

T+E  83.86  2.39  0.43 

KiTS2019 

T 8.71  nan  inf 

E 79.30  82.89  37.99 

T+E  90.84  8.81  2.12 

Mix -Seq -Brain 

T 11.43  nan  inf 

E 73.03  13.84  3.86 

T+E  74.29  9.28  3.00 

One -Seq -Liver 

T 3.92  nan  inf 

E 72.93  26.48  8.52 

T+E  76.28  5.42  1.60 

Mix -Seq -Abdomen 

T 8.94  nan  inf 

E 79.17  9.76  2.38 

T+E  80.01  5.73  1.40 

As shown in Table 4 , text -only prompts (T) consistently yield the poorest segmentation performance 

across all evaluated datasets, indicating that relying solely on textual descriptions is insufficient for 

accurate lesion recognition and delineation. For instance, the DICE sc ores obtained with text -only prompts 

are extremely low on several datasets, including 0.69% on BraTS2023 -MET, 3.96% on MSD Pancreas, 9.17% 

on MSD Colon, and 1.99% on KiTS2019 , highlighting the inherent difficulty of localizing lesions without 

visual guidan ce. In contrast, image exemplar -based prompting (E) substantially improves segmentation 18 

performance across all datasets. Moreover, the combined use of text and image exemplars (T+E) generally 

achieves the best or near -best performance, outperforming image exemplars alone in most cases. 

Specifically, the DICE score is further improved by 2.90%, 3.07%, 2.72% and 11.54 % on the BraTS2023 -

MET, MSD Lung, MSD Pancreas , and KiTS2019 datasets, respectively. The only exception is observed for 

ischemic stroke lesion s egmentation on the ISLES22 -DWI dataset, where adding text prompts leads to a 

slight degradation in DICE. 

Notably, despite this decrease in overlap accuracy, the T+E prompting strategy consistently improves 

surface -based metrics (HD95 and ASD) across all da tasets, suggesting that textual prompts contribute to 

more accurate boundary delineation. Overall, these results demonstrate that visual exemplars play a 

critical role in concept -based lesion segmentation, while textual prompts provide complementary 

semant ic guidance when used in conjunction with image exemplars. 

(3) Prior -driven Input Augmentation 

a) Input augmentation with preceding slices ’ prediction mask s

Table 5 presents the results of incorporating the prediction mask s from adjacent, preceding slice s as an 

additional input channel. This strategy aims to provide coarse localization priors under the assumption 

that lesions typically span multiple adjacent slices. As shown in Table 5, integrating the previous prediction 

mask leads to DICE improvements on several datasets, for instance BraTS2023 -MET, Mix -Seq -Brain, and 

Mix -Seq -Abdomen, demonstrating that even simple mask -based priors can be beneficial for lesion 

segm entation. 

However, the effectiveness of this strategy is not consistent across all datasets. For example, performance 

degradation is observed on MSD Lung , and metric trade -offs are evident on Mix -Seq -Brain , where D ICE 

improves substantially while the surfa ce -based metric HD95 deteriorate s. These results suggest that 

naïvely concatenating pr eceding prediction masks may introduce noisy or misleading spatial cues, 

particularly when lesions exhibit discontinuous appearance across slices, significant shape varia tion, or 

when prediction errors propagate from pre ceding slices. More robust strategies , such as confidence -

aware mask fusion or selective gating mechanisms , may be necessary to fully exploit mask -based priors 

while avoiding error accumulation and false -positive propagation. 

Table 5. Quantitative comparison of segmentation performance with and without using preceding slices’ 

prediction mask s as prior, for four public and three in -house datasets. Results are reported for models 

using text and image e xemplar prompts. 

Dataset  Preceding Slice ’s 

Prediction Mask  DICE (%)  HD95 

(vo xel )

ASD 

(vo xel )

BraTS2023 -MET  w/o  77.29  4.24  1.06 

w 78.11  3.2 0 0.88 

MSD Lung  w/o  86.97  2.28  0.76 

w 84.15  3.23  1.02 

KiTS2019  w/o  90.84  8.81  2.12 

w 90.33  4.62  0.86 

Mix -Seq -Brain  w/o  74.29  9.28  3.00 19 

w 78.24  9.79  2.86 

One -Seq -Liver  w/o  76.28  5.42  1.6 0

w 76.29  10.56  1.05 

Mix -Seq -Abdomen  w/o  80.01  5.73  1.4 0

w 80.74  8.35  1.15 

b) Input augmentation with multi modal images 

To assess the effectiveness of multi -modality input augmentation, we evaluate our approach on two 

multimodal datasets: BraTS2023 -MET and ISLSE22. As summarized in Table 6, incorporating multiple 

imaging modalities generally leads to improved segmentation performance, indicating that 

complementary modality -specific information is beneficial for lesion delineation. 

On the BraTS2023 -MET dataset, progressively adding imaging modalities consistently improves 

performance. In particular, combining T1 -C, T2 -F, and T2 -W images yields a 2.78 % absolute DICE 

improvement compared with using only the T1 -C modality. These results demonstrate that multi modal 

fusion effectively enriches lesion -related contextual information and enhances segmentation robustness. 

For the ISLSE 22 dataset, while single -modal performance varies across DWI and ADC inputs, their joint use 

results in improved surface -based metrics (HD95 and ASD), highlighting the complementary nature of 

diffusion -derived modalities. However, the D ICE of the combined input improves modest ly over ADC -only 

results, while being inferior compared with the DWI -only inputs. It suggest s that modality relevance and 

quality also play a critical role in determining the effectiveness of multimodal fusion. Overall, these 

findings indicate that input -level multi -modality concatenation is a simple yet potentially effective 

strategy for improving lesion segmentation performance, although its benefits may be dataset - and 

modality -dependent. 

Table 6. Quantitative evaluation of multimodal input augmentation on BraTS2023 -MET and ISLSE22 

datasets. Results are reported for models using text and image exemplar prompts. 

Dataset  Input  DICE (%)  HD95 (vo xel ) ASD (vo xel )

BraTS2023 -MET 

T1 -C 77.29  4.24  1.06 

T1 -C+T2 -F 77.82  3.75  0.99 

T1 -C+T1 -W 77.53  3.55  0.98 

T1 -C+T2 -W 78.61  3.22  0.89 

T1 -C+T2 -F+T1 -W 79.25  3.80  1.08 

T1 -C+T2 -F+T2 -W 80.07  4.03  1.08 

ISLSE22 

DWI  64.94  6.27  1.55 

ADC  58.03  6.24  1.43 

DWI + ADC  60.09  5.26  0.79 

c) Input augmentation by using pr ior images/ annotation s

Treatment regimens like a daptive radiation therapy (ART) involve repeated imaging and segmentation for 

the same patient across multiple sequential treatment fractions , where prior knowledge is usually 

available to guide each new, patient -specific segmentation task . To leverage this information, we used 

the three in -house datasets that included both the current MR images and the prior MR images (along 20 

with their corresponding tumor annotations ) from previous treatment sessions . As described in Sec. 2.3.3 ,

the current MR scan is supplemented with prior MR images and their annotations , resulting in a three -

channel input that encodes both temporal and anatomical context for segmentation . Quantitative results 

are summarized in Table 7. Incorporating prior MR information yields consistent performance gains, 

achieving absolute Dice improvements of 10.19%, 7.87%, and 4.47% on the Mix -Seq -Brain, One -Seq -Liver, 

and Mix -Seq -Abdomen datasets, respectively. These findings indicate that the i ntegration of previous MR 

images and annotations effectively enhances SAM3 ’s performance for lesion segmentation in the ART 

setting. 

Table 7. Segmentation performance of SAM3 with and without prior MR images and annotations as 

guidance . Results are reported for models using text and image exemplar prompts. 

Dataset 

Prior 

image/annotation -

guided 

DICE (%)  HD95 (vo xel ) ASD (vo xel )

Mix -Seq -Brain  No  74.29  9.28  3.00 

Yes  85.08  6.89  1.97 

One -Seq -Liver  No  76.28  5.42  1.6 0

Yes  84.15  2.89  0.74 

Mix -Seq -Abdomen  No  80.01  5.73  1.4 0

Yes  84.48  3.03  0.82 

4.3 Evaluation of Fine -Tuning Strategies 

To evaluate the effectiveness of fine -tuning, we fine -tuned SAM3 using the BraTS2023 -MET dataset. Three 

fine -tuning strategies were investigated: fine -tuning all model parameters, fine -tuning only the detector 

module, and fine -tuning only the additional ad apter modules. An overview of these strategies is illustrated 

in Fig. 4 .

Table 8 presents a quantitative comparison of the different fine -tuning strategies on the BraTS2023 -MET 

dataset. Among all approaches, adapter -based fine -tuning achieves the best over all performance, yielding 

the highest Dice score (82.96%), as well as the lowest average surface distance (ASD). In contrast, fine -

tuning all parameters or only the detector module provides limited or inconsistent improvements 

compared to the baseline with out fine -tuning. These results highlight the effectiveness of parameter -

efficient adapter -based fine -tuning for lesion segmentation. 

Table 8. Comparison between different fine -tuning strategies on the BraTS2023 -MET dataset. 

FT Module  DICE (%)  HD95 (vo xel ) ASD (vo xel )

None  77.29  4.24  1.06 

All  79.16  6.81  1.45 

Detector  76.42  6.22  1.03 

Adapter  82.96  5.42  0.90 

4.4 Visual Results 21 

(1) Visual results of SAM2 and SAM3 using bounding box prompts 

Figure 5 presents representative lesion segmentation results obtained with SAM2 and SAM3 across 

multiple datasets, including brain, breast, polyp, skin, lung, liver, pancreas, and kidney, where tight 

bounding boxes are used as geometric prompts. Overall, both models demonstrate comparable 

segmentation performance on most samples, indicating similar generalization ability across different 

anatomical structures and imaging modalities. However, SAM3 exhibits improved contextual 

understandin g in several challenging cases, as reflected in the breast and pancreas examples shown in 

Figure 5 . In these instances, SAM3 produces segmentations that better align with lesion boundaries and 

surrounding anatomical context, suggesting that the model benef its from enhanced feature 

representation and stronger global reasoning capability compared with SAM2. 

Figure 5 . Visualization of lesion segmentation results obtained with SAM2 and SAM3 using bounding 

boxes as prompts. The green contours indicate the grou nd truth annotations, and the white masks 

represent the predicted segmentation results. The same color convention is used in the following 

figures .

(2) Visual results of SAM3 using concept -based prompts 

Figure 6 demonstrates visual results of SAM3 for lesion segmentation using three types of prompts: text 

description (“lesion”), image exemplar, and the combination of text and image exemplar. xamples from 

the brain, breast, lung, liver, and pancreas datasets are shown. The results demonstrate that: 1) Using 

only text prompts yields the poorest performance, as several lesions cannot be correctly detected in 

multiple cases shown in Figure 6 ; 2) Using image exemplars significantly improves segmentation accuracy; 

howe ver, it tends to produce over -segmentation in some cases, such as the breast and lung examples ; 3) 

Combining text and image exemplar prompts achieves the best overall performance, producing more 

accurate lesion localization and boundaries across different organs. 22 

Figure 6. Visualization of lesion segmentation results in the brain, breast, lung, liver, and pancreas using 

different prompt types, including text (2 nd column) , image exemplar (3 rd column) , and their combination 

(4 th column) .

(3) Visual results of SAM3 with and without using previous images and annotations as prior knowledge 

Figure 7 presents visual results on our in -house adaptive radiation therapy datasets, including Mix -Seq -

Brain, One -Seq -Liver, and Mix -Seq -Abdomen, for brain, l iver, and abdominal lesion segmentation using a

combination of the text and the image exemplar as prompts . As shown in the figure, incorporating 

previous images and their corresponding annotations as additional guidance consistently improves the 

final segm entation results. This observation is consistent with the quantitative results reported in Table 

7, demonstrating that temporal or sequential prior information provides useful contextual cues for more 

accurate lesion localization and boundary delineation. 23 

Figure 7 . Visual segmentation results without pr ior image and annotation knowledge (2nd column) and 

with prior knowledge (3rd column). 

(4) Visual comparison of segmentation results under different fine -tuning strategies 

Figure 8 presents the visual results obtained with the original SAM3 model, SAM3 with full fine -tuning, 

SAM3 with detector -only fine -tuning, and SAM3 with adapter -based fine -tuning on the BraTS2023 -MET 

dataset with combin ed texture and image exemplar as prompts . A s shown, fine -tuning consistently 

improves segmentation performance over the original SAM3 model, indicating the benefit of task -specific 

adaptation. 

Among the three fine -tuning strategies, detector -only fine -tuning yields inferior results compared with 

bo th full fine -tuning and adapter -based fine -tuning, suggesting that updating only the detection module 

is insufficient for optimal lesion segmentation. Furthermore, when comparing full fine -tuning with 

adapter -based fine -tuning, the adapter -based approach a chieves better results on this dataset. This 

observation suggests that, under limited training data, full fine -tuning may introduce a higher risk of 

overfitting, while adapter -based fine -tuning provides a more stable and parameter -efficient alternative. 24 

Figure 8. Visual segmentation results obtained with the original SAM3 (2 nd column) , SAM3 with full fine -

tuning (3 rd column) , SAM3 with detector -only fine -tuning (4 th column) , and SAM3 with adapter -based 

fine -tuning (5 th column) . The green contours indica te the ground truth, and the white masks denote the 

predicted segmentation s.

5. Discussion 

In this study, we evaluate d the lesion segmentation performance of the original SAM3 framework using 

concept -based prompts. W e also explore d potential strategies to further improve effectiveness through 

the integration of prior knowledge via input enhancement without additional training . Finally, we 

investigate d multiple fine -tuning strategies for SAM3. Although both prior -knowledge augmentation and 

fine -tuning improve d the segmentation performance of SAM3 , several limitations remain and warrant 

investigations in future work. 

(1) Prior knowledge integration as input 

Prior knowledge , such as spatial location, relative scale, and multimodal imaging informat ion , plays a 

critical role in accurate lesion localization and delineation. Previous work, including SAM2 -Aug [65] , has 

demonstrated that integrating prior MR images and their corresponding annotations into SAM2 can 

substantially improve tumor localization and segmentation performance in adaptive radiation therapy 

scenarios, where historical imaging and annotations are readily available. In this study, we observe that a 

similar strategy is also effective for SAM3 (Table 7 , Figure 7 ). The effectiveness of this approach is largely 

attributed to the fact that tumor mor phology and location typically exhibit limited variation s between 

consecutive treatment sessions. However, naïvely supplement ing prior MR images and their annotations 

with the current input may be less ideal . Such a strategy primarily provides coarse spati al cues and may 

be susceptible to additional noise, including inaccurate boundaries and deformation /motion between 

current and prior imaging. 25 

Moreover, we find that directly using predicted masks from preceding slices of 3D volumes as prior can 

improve SA M3 ’s segmentation performance in some but not all scenarios (Table 5 ). For example, a 

previous slice may contain a lesion while the current slice does not, leading to the introduction of 

misleading information and an increased risk of false -positive predic tions. Similarly, using multimodal 

images as input generally helps with the segmentation performance, but can also lead to decreased 

accuracy in some scenarios (Table 6 ). These observations highlight a key limitation of naïve prior -

knowledge integration. 

Therefore, an effective segmentation framework should be capable of distinguishing subtle discrepancies 

between the current image and auxiliary prior information, while selectively leveraging prior knowledge 

to refine segmentation results. Learning such ad aptive fusion mechanisms remains an important direction 

for improving the robustness, generaliza bility , and detection accuracy of SAM3 -based lesion 

segmentation. 

(2) Automatic prompt generation 

Prompt augmentation proves an effective strategy for SAM -based methods [65, 66] . In this study, we 

investigate its effectiveness for lesion segmentation under concept -based prompting, using text and/or 

image exemplars. Our initi al results indicate that relying solely on text prompts is insufficient for accurate 

lesion localization, primarily due to the low contrast of lesions and their visual similarity to surrounding 

tissues or organs. While combining text prompts with image exe mplars significantly improves 

performance, this approach remains inefficient and potentially impractical in clinical settings, as it 

requires manual identification of lesion exemplars for each image slice. 

To address this limitation, a simplified prompt a ugmentation strategy could be explored, in which one or 

a small set of image exemplars from a training image or a subset of training images is reused as shared 

prompts across all test samples in SAM3. Specifically, in a one -shot scenario, a single lesion i mage 

exemplar from the training set is selected and reused as a common prompt for all test samples. In a multi -

exemplar scenario, a set of lesion exemplars can first be constructed based on predefined selection 

criteria or similarity metrics. Subsequently, an automatic selection algorithm can be employed to identify 

one or more representative exemplars to serve as prompts from the library . Compared with per -image or 

per -slice exemplar prompting, both strategies could substantially improve computational and annotation 

efficiency while still providing meaningful visual guidance to the model. 

In addition, several promising directions merit further investigation for candidate lesion detection using 

image exemplars as guidance . First, at the image level, anatomic al priors could be leveraged to copy and 

place image exemplars into anatomically corresponding regions using multi -scale and deformable 

transformations, while also accounting for intensity distribution differences between the exemplar and 

target images. Se cond, at the feature level, multi -layer features extracted from the SAM3 image encoder 

could be exploited to compute similarity between the exemplar and test samples, enabling automatic 

candidate region or bounding -box generation for adaptive exemplar prom pting. Third, it may be beneficial 

to design and train a dedicated prompt generation module or to leverage the streaming memory 

mechanism of SAM3, allowing the model to capture temporal relationships across frames and track 

lesions using a single prompt. 

(3) Fine -tuning for SAM3 26 

Fine -tuning is essential for mitigating the domain gap between natural images and medical imaging data 

when adapting foundation models [27, 35] . We investigated different fine -tuning strategies for SAM3 and 

found the one focused on lightweight adapter modules to be the most effective . While this approach 

demonstrates performance improvements on one d ataset , several limitations remain. 

First, the issue of knowledge degradation after fine -tuning warrants further investigation. The 

performance, especially on generalizability, can drop following fine -tuning, raising concerns about 

catastrophic forgetting , particularly when fully fine -tuning large pre -trained models. Developing strategies 

to preserve generalizable knowledge while adapting to domain -specific tasks remains an open challenge. 

Second, in this study, adapter modules are inserted into the image e ncoder based on empirical design 

choices. However, principled guidelines for determining which components of SAM3 should be fine -tuned 

are still lacking. For example, it remains unclear whether fine -tuning should also involve the prompt 

encoder, detector, or mask decoder, and how such choices affect performance, stability, and 

generalization. Finally, jointly exploring fine -tuning and model distillation may offer a promising direction. 

Such a strategy could not only enhance model generalization and segmenta tion accuracy but also facilitate 

the derivation of compact and efficient models suitable for deployment in resource -constrained or edge -

computing environments. 

(4) Uncertainty modeling and human -based prior k nowledge 

Binary lesion segmentation is often a n ill -defined problem. Clinically, lesions can be categorized as 

conspicuous lesions (CL) and non -conspicuous lesions (nCL) [37] . In this study, we focus on CL, for which 

binary annotations are typically regarded as the default ground truth. However, in practice, lesion 

boundaries are rarely crisp or strictly binary. Both CL and nCL often exhibit g radual transitions from regions 

of high diagnostic confidence to areas of lower certainty. Consequently, modeling the uncertainty or 

fuzziness of lesion boundaries is meaningful, as it may provide additional information that can assist 

clinical interpretat ion and decision -making. Several studies [37, 67, 68] have explored disease 

quantification without explicit object delineation to improve the efficiency of clinical workflows. In 

addition, inspired by recent advances in vision -language modeling, clinically relevant knowledge could be 

further integrated into segmentation frameworks. For example, textual descriptions can capture 

modality -specific characteristics of lesions and encode expert knowledge regarding their appearance 

across different imaging modalit ies. Lesions that appear clearly in CT may present differently in PET, and 

vice versa. Therefore, incorporating human -based prior knowledge in textual form to describe such cross -

modality differences may help improve both segmentation accuracy and efficien cy. 

6. Conclusion 

In this study, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the Segment Anything Model 3 (SAM3) for 

concept -based lesion segmentation across different medical image modalities and diverse anatomical 

regions. A total of 13 datasets encompassi ng 11 lesion types were investigated to assess the generalization 

capability, robustness, and limitations of SAM3 under text - and exemplar -based prompting without 

reliance on explicit geometric annotations. Our results demonstrate that SAM3 exhibits strong cross -

dataset and cross -modality generalization, although performance variability is observed across different 

lesion types and imaging modalities. By integrating prior knowledge and employing parameter -efficient 

fine -tuning strategies , segmentation accur acy and robustness can be further improved. These findings 27 

suggest that concept -driven vision -language foundation models hold significant promise for scalable 

lesion segmentation and may serve as a foundation for more flexible and annotation -efficient clin ical 

workflows. 

Acknowledgement 

Authors would also like to sincerely thank Hengrui Zhao, Yan Dai, Yajun Yu, Hao Peng, Steve Jiang, Joe 

Wise, Charles Gibson, and Lana Shar for their valuable assistance and support. 

Authors’ contributions 

Guoping Xu contributed to writing -original draft, methodology, software, visualization, conceptualization, 

formal analysis, data curation; Jayaram K. Udupa and Yubing Tong contributed to writing -review and 

editing; Xin Long, Ying Zhang and Jie Deng contrib uted to conceptualization and data curation; Weiguo Lu 

contributed to data curation and conceptualization; You Zhang contributed to methodology, supervision, 

funding acquisition, writing -review and editing. 

Funding 

The study was supported by the US Nationa l Institutes of Health (R01 CA240808, R01 CA258987, R01 

EB034691, and R01 CA280135). 

# Declarations 

Availability of supporting data 

The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author 

on reasonable request. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 

could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Reference 

1 Xu, G., Udupa, J. ., uo, J., Zhao, ., Yu, Y., Raymond, . ., eng, ., Ning, ., Rathi, Y., and iu, W.: 

‘Is the medical image segmentation problem solved? survey of current developments and future 

directions’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.20139, 2025 

2 Xu, G., Udupa, J. ., ong, Y., dhner, ., ao, ., and origian, . .:  ‘ R‐ N‐ Q: automatic 

anatomy recognition based disease quantification in thoracic lymph node zones via G / images 

without nodal delineation ’, ed hys, 2020, 47, (8), pp. 34 67 3484 

3 Ronneberger, ., ischer, ., and rox, .: ‘U net: onvolutional networ s for biomedical image 

segmentation’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo U net: onvolutional networ s for biomedical image 

segmentation’ ( pringer, 2015, edn.), pp. 234 241 

4 Zhou, Z., iddiquee, . .R., a ba hsh, N., and iang, J.: ‘Unet : Redesigning s ip connections 

to exploit multiscale features in image segmentation’, I transactions on medical imaging, 2019, 39, (6), 28 

pp. 1856 1867 

5 hen, . ., apandreou, G., o inos, I., urphy, ., and Yuille, . .: ‘ eeplab: emantic image 

segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs’, I

transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2017, 40, (4), pp. 834 848 

6 hen, . ., Zhu, Y., apandreou, G., ch roff, ., and dam, .: ‘ ncoder decoder with atrous 

separable convolution for semantic image segmentation’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo ncoder decoder 

with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation’ (2018, edn.), pp. 801 818 

7 Guo, . ., u, . Z., ou, Q., iu, Z., heng, . ., and u, . .: ‘ egnext: Rethin ing 

convolutional attention design for semantic segmentation’, dvances in Neural Information rocessing 

ystems, 2022, 35, pp. 1140 1156 

8 Zhao, ., hi, J., Qi, X., Wa ng, X., and Jia, J.: ‘ yramid scene parsing networ ’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): 

‘ oo yramid scene parsing networ ’ (2017, edn.), pp. 2881 2890 

9 Xiao, ., iu, Y., Zhou, ., Jiang, Y., and un, J.: ‘Unified perceptual parsing for scene understanding’, 

in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo Unified perceptual parsing for scene understanding’ (2018, edn.), pp. 418 434 

10  hen, J., ei, J., i, X., u, Y., Yu, Q., Wei, Q., uo, X., Xie, Y., deli, ., and Wang, Y.: ‘ ransUNet: 

Rethin ing the U Net architecture design for medical image segmentation through the lens of 

transformers’, edical Image nalysis, 2024, 97, pp. 103280 

11  Xu, G., Zhang, X., e, X., and Wu, X.: ‘ evit unet: a e faster encoders with transformer for 

medical image segmentation’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds .): ‘ oo evit unet: a e faster encoders with 

transformer for medical image segmentation’ ( pringer, 2023, edn.), pp. 42 53 

12  ao, ., Wang, Y., hen, J., Jiang, ., Zhang, X., ian, Q., and Wang, .: ‘ win unet: Unet li e pure 

transformer for medical i mage segmentation’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo win unet: Unet li e pure 

transformer for medical image segmentation’ ( pringer, 2022, edn.), pp. 205 218 

13  atamizadeh, ., ang, Y., Nath, ., Yang, ., yronen o, ., andman, ., Roth, .R., and Xu, .:

‘Unetr: ransformers for 3d medical image segmentation’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo Unetr: ransformers 

for 3d medical image segmentation’ (2022, edn.), pp. 574 584 

14  ha er, . ., aaz, ., Rasheed, ., han, ., Yang, . ., and han, . .: ‘UN R : delving into 

efficient and accurate 3 medical image segmentation’, I ransactions on edical Imaging, 2024 

15  hlap, ., in, ., andenberg, N., owling, J., olloway, ., and aworth, .: ‘ review of medical 

image data augmentation techniques for deep learning applications’, Journal of medical imaging and 

radiation oncology, 2021, 65, (5), pp. 545 563 

16  ou, Q., Yu, ., hen, ., Jin, Y., Yang, X., Qin, J., and eng, . .: ‘3 deeply supervised networ 

for automated segmentation of volumetric me dical images’, edical image analysis, 2017, 41, pp. 40 54 

17  urugesan, ., iu, ., Galdran, ., yed, I. ., and olz, J.: ‘ alibrating segmentation networ s 

with margin based label smoothing’, edical Image nalysis, 2023, 87, pp. 102826 

18  ehrtash, ., Wells, W. ., empany, . ., bolmaesumi, ., and apur, .: ‘ onfidence calibration 

and predictive uncertainty estimation for deep medical image segmentation’, I transactions on medical 

imaging, 2020, 39, (12), pp. 3868 3878 

19  eng, X. ., Wang, X.X., Yue, W. ., Jin, J.X., and Xu, G. .: ‘ tructural tensor and frequency guided 

semi supervised segmentation for medical images’, ed hys, 2024 

20  Zhao, Z., Zhang, Y., Wu, ., Zhang, X., Zhou, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., and Xie, W.: ‘ arge vocabulary 

segmentat ion for medical images with text prompts’, N J igital edicine, 2025, 8, (1), pp. 566 

21  Wor shop, ., cao, . ., an, ., i i, ., avlic , ., Ilić, ., esslow, ., astagné, R., uccioni, 

. ., and Yvon, .: ‘ loom: 176b parameter open access mul tilingual language model’, arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2211.05100, 2022 

22  iu, ., eng, ., Xue, ., Wang, ., Wu, ., u, ., Zhao, ., eng, ., Zhang, ., and Ruan, .: 

‘ eepsee v3 technical report’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437, 2024 

23  iméoni, ., o, . ., eitzer, ., aldassarre, ., quab, ., Jose, ., halidov, ., zafraniec, ., 29 

Yi, ., and Ramamon isoa, .: ‘ inov3’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104, 2025 

24  e, ., hen, X., Xie, ., i, Y., ollár, ., and Girshic , R.: ‘ as e d autoencoders are scalable vision 

learners’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo as ed autoencoders are scalable vision learners’ (2022, edn.), pp. 

16000 16009 

25  irillov, ., intun, ., Ravi, N., ao, ., Rolland, ., Gustafson, ., Xiao, ., Whitehead, ., erg, 

. ., and o, W. Y.: ‘ egment anything’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo egment anything’ (2023, edn.), pp. 

4015 4026 

26  a, J., e, Y., i, ., an, ., You, ., and Wang, .: ‘ egment anything in medical images’, Nature 

ommunications, 2024, 15, (1 ), pp. 654 

27  Wang, ., Guo, ., Ye, J., eng, Z., heng, J., i, ., hen, J., u, Y., uang, Z., and hen, Y.: ‘ am 

med3d: towards general purpose segmentation models for volumetric medical images’, arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2310.15161, 2023 

28  Ravi, N., Gabe ur, ., u, Y. ., u, R., Ryali, ., a, ., hedr, ., Rädle, R., Rolland, ., and Gustafson, 

.: ‘ am 2: egment anything in images and videos’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024 

29  Xu, G., abat, ., and Zhang, Y.: ‘ epthwise dilated convolutional adapters for medical ob ect 

trac ing and segmentation using the segment anything model 2’, achine earning: cience and 

echnology, 2025, 6, (4), pp. 045026 

30  Xu, G., hao, . ., and Zhang, Y.: ‘ 2: ulti scale emporal ampling ugmentation and 

emory plitting runing for romptable ideo b ect egmentation and rac ing in urgical cenarios’, 

achine earning: ealth, 2025 

31  arion, N., Gustafson, ., u, Y. ., ebnath, ., u, R., uris, ., Ryali, ., lwala, . ., hedr, ., 

and uang, .: ‘ am 3: egment anything with concepts’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719, 2025 

32  ap ota, R., Roumeliotis, .I., and ar ee, .: ‘ he 2 to 3 Gap in the egment nything 

odel amily: Why rompt ased xpertise ails in oncept riven Image egment ation’, arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2512.06032, 2025 

33  ha rabarty, ., and oni, R.: ‘ omparing 2 and 3 for Zero hot egmentation of 3 

edical ata’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21926, 2025 

34  hen, ., ao, R., Yu, X., Zhu, ., ing, ., Ji, ., hen, ., Zhu, Q., Xu, ., and ao, .: ‘ 3 dapter: 

fficient daptation of egment nything 3 for amouflage b ect egmentation, hadow etection, and 

edical Image egmentation’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19425, 2025 

35  iu, ., Xue, R., ao, X.R., hen, Y ., u, Y., i, X., hen, Q., and hen, J.: ‘ ed 3: elving into 

egment nything with edical oncepts’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19046, 2025 

36  Xu, G., ao, ., Udupa, J. ., ong, Y., and origian, . .: ‘ i egNet: deep dilated convolutional 

encoder decoder architecture for lymph node segmentation on / images’, omputerized edical 

Imaging and Graphics, 2021, 88, pp. 101851 

37  ong, Y., Udupa, J. ., dhner, ., Wu, ., chuster, .J., and origian, . .: ‘ isease quantification 

on / images w ithout explicit ob ect delineation’, edical image analysis, 2019, 51, pp. 169 183 

38  a ella, ., aid, U., hanna, ., c urney in, ., c ean, R., Nedelec, ., Rashid, ., ahon, N. ., 

ltes, ., and halerao, R.: ‘ nalysis of the ra 2023 intracrani al meningioma segmentation challenge’, 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09787, 2024 

39  eller, N., Isensee, ., aier ein, . ., ou, X., Xie, ., i, ., Nan, Y., u, G., in, Z., and an, .: 

‘ he state of the art in idney and idney tumor segmentation in con trast enhanced imaging: Results 

of the i 19 challenge’, edical image analysis, 2021, 67, pp. 101821 

40  ilic, ., hrist, ., i, . ., orontsov, ., en ohen, ., aissis, G., zes in, ., Jacobs, ., amani, 

G. . ., and hartrand, G.: ‘ he liver tumor segmentation benchmar (lits)’, edical image analysis, 2023, 

84, pp. 102680 

41  l habyani, W., Gomaa, ., haled, ., and ahmy, .: ‘ ataset of breast ultrasound images’, 

ata in brief, 2020, 28, pp. 104863 30 

42  odella, N., Rotemberg, ., schandl, ., elebi, . ., usza, ., Gutman, ., elba, ., alloo, ., 

iopyris, ., and archetti, .: ‘ in lesion analysis toward melanoma detection 2018: challenge hosted 

by the international s in imaging collaboration (isic)’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.03 368, 2019 

43  Jha, ., medsrud, . ., Riegler, . ., Johansen, ., e ange, ., alvorsen, ., and Johansen, . .: 

‘Resunet : n advanced architecture for medical image segmentation’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo 

Resunet : n advanced architecture for medical image segmentation’ (I , 2019, edn.), pp. 225 2255 

44  Isensee, ., Jaeger, . ., ohl, . ., etersen, J., and aier ein, . .: ‘nnU Net: a self configuring 

method for deep learning based biomedical image segmentation’, Nature methods, 2021, 18, (2), pp. 203 

211 

45  heng, ., isra, I., chwing, .G., irillov, ., and Girdhar, R.: ‘ as ed attention mas transformer 

for universal image segmentation’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo as ed attention mas transformer for 

universal image segmentation’ (2022, edn.), pp. 1290 1299 

46  heng, J. ., iao, Y. ., and uang, . R.: ‘ pply mas ed attention mas transformer to instance 

segmentation in pathology images’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo pply mas ed attention mas transformer 

to instance segmentat ion in pathology images’ (I , 2023, edn.), pp. 342 345 

47  Gu, Y., Wu, Q., ang, ., ai, X., hu, ., i, ., and hen, Y.: ‘ e : dapt egment nything 

odel for medical lesion segmentation’, I Journal of iomedical and ealth Informatics, 2024 

48  Zhu, J., Qi, Y., and Wu, J.: ‘ edical sam 2: egment medical images as video via segment anything 

model 2’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00874, 2024 

49  Radford, ., im, J.W., allacy, ., Ramesh, ., Goh, G., garwal, ., astry, G., s ell, ., ish in, 

., and lar , J.: ‘ earning transferable visual models from natural language supervision’, in ditor 

( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo earning transferable visual models from natural language supervision’ ( m R, 2021, 

edn.), pp. 8748 8763 

50  iu, ., Zeng, Z., Ren, ., i, ., Zhang, ., Yang, J., Jiang, Q., i, ., Yang, J., and u, .: ‘Grounding 

dino: arrying dino with grounded pre training for open set ob ect detection’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo 

Grounding dino: arrying dino with grounded pre training for open set ob ect detection’ ( pringer, 2024, 

edn.), pp. 38 55 

51  Ren, ., hen, Y., Jiang, Q., Zeng, Z., Xiong, Y., iu, W., a, Z., hen, J., Gao, Y., and Jiang, X.: ‘ ino 

x: unified vision model for open world ob ect detection and understanding’, arXiv prepri nt 

arXiv:2411.14347, 2024 

52  olya, ., uang, . Y., un, ., ho, J. ., adotto, ., Wei, ., a, ., Zhi, J., Ra asegaran, J., and 

Rasheed, .: ‘ erception encoder: he best visual embeddings are not at the output of the networ ’, arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2504.13181, 2025 

53  Zheng, ., hen, ., ang, ., uo, Y., u, ., u, ., Wen, Y., and ao, .: ‘ earning from models 

beyond fine tuning’, Nature achine Intelligence, 2025, 7, (1), pp. 6 17 

54  ung, Y. ., Nair, ., and Raffel, . .: ‘ raining neural networ s with fixed sparse mas s’, dvances 

in Neural Information rocessing ystems, 2021, 34, pp. 24193 24205 

55  Za en, . ., Goldberg, Y., and Ravfogel, .: ‘ itfit: imple parameter efficient fine tuning for 

transformer based mas ed la nguage models’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo itfit: imple parameter 

efficient fine tuning for transformer based mas ed language models’ (2022, edn.), pp. 1 9

56  oulsby, N., Giurgiu, ., Jastrzebs i, ., orrone, ., e aroussilhe, Q., Gesmundo, ., ttariyan, 

., and Gelly, .: ‘ arameter efficient transfer learning for N ’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo arameter 

efficient transfer learning for N ’ ( R, 2019, edn.), pp. 2790 2799 

57  u, .J., hen, Y., Wallis, ., llen Zhu, Z., i, Y., Wang, ., Wang, ., and hen, W.: ‘ ora: ow ran 

adaptation of large language models’, I R, 2022, 1, (2), pp. 3 

58  hen, ., u, ., Zhu, ., ing, ., Yu, ., Ji, ., i, Z., un, ., ao, ., and Zang, Y.: ‘ am2 adapter: 

valuating & adapting segment anything 2 in downstream tas s: amouflage, shadow, medical image 

segmentation, and more’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04579, 2024 31 

59  Gong, ., Zhong, Y., a, W., i, J., Wang, Z., Zhang, J., eng, . ., and ou, Q.: ‘3 adapter: 

olistic adaptation of from 2 to 3 for promptable tumor segmentation’, edical Image nalysis, 

2024, 98, pp. 103324 

60  arion, N., assa, ., ynnaeve, G., Usunier, N., irillov, ., and Zagoruy o, .: ‘ nd to end ob ect 

detection with transformers’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo nd to end ob ect detection with transformers’ 

( pringer, 2020, edn.), pp. 213 229 

61  athmanathan, .U., van s, N.J., er mei er, .G., hristodouleas, J., awton, . ., esprini, ., 

van der eide, U. ., ran , .J., Nill, ., and elf e, U.: ‘ agnetic reso nance imaging guided adaptive 

radiation therapy: a “game changer” for prostate treatment?’, International Journal of Radiation 

ncology* iology* hysics, 2018, 100, (2), pp. 361 373 

62  oawad, .W., Janas, ., aid, U., Rama rishnan, ., alu a, R., shra f, N., ale i, N., Je el, ., 

Yordanov, N., and ehringer, .: ‘ he brain tumor segmentation metastases (brats mets) challenge 2023: 

rain metastasis segmentation on pre treatment mri’, rXiv, 2024, pp. arXiv: 2306.00838 v00833 

63  ernandez etzsche, .R., de la Rosa, ., anning, U., Wiest, R., alenzuela, W., Reyes, ., eyer, 

., iew, . ., ofler, ., zhov, I., Robben, ., utton, ., riedrich, ., Zarth, ., ür le, J., aran, . ., 

enze, ., rooc s, G., eyer, ., Zimmer, ., oec h ehrens, ., erndt, ., I enberg, ., Wiestler, ., 

and irsch e, J. .: ‘I 2022: multi center magnetic resonance imaging stro e lesion segmentation 

dataset’, cientific ata, 2022, 9, (1), pp. 762 

64  ntonelli, ., Rein e, ., a as, ., arahani, ., opp chn eider, ., andman, . ., it ens, G., 

enze, ., Ronneberger, ., and ummers, R. .: ‘ he medical segmentation decathlon’, Nature 

communications, 2022, 13, (1), pp. 4128 

65  Xu, G., ai, Y., Zhao, ., Zhang, Y., eng, J., u, W., and Zhang, Y.: ‘ 2 ug: rior nowledge 

based ugmentation for arget olume uto egmentation in daptive Radiation herapy Using egment 

nything odel 2’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.19282, 2025 

66  ai, ., a, ., Yan, Z., iu, Z., hi, ., i, Y., hu, ., Wei, X., Zhao, ., a nd Wu, Z.: ‘ amaug: oint 

prompt augmentation for segment anything model’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01187, 2023 

67  i, J., Udupa, J. ., ong, Y., and origian, . .: ‘ rediction of disease quantification via /

images and auto segmentation of target o b ects’, in ditor ( d.)^( ds.): ‘ oo rediction of disease 

quantification via / images and auto segmentation of target ob ects’ ( I , 2025, edn.), pp. 

68  all, .: ‘ ybrid Intelligence ramewor for athological iver egmentation and esion etec tion 

in iagnostic Imaging’, University of ennsylvania, 2025