Title: QVAD: A Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Efficient and Training-Free Video Anomaly Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03040v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:48:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# QVAD: A Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Efficient and Training-Free Video Anomaly Detection 

Lokman Bekit 1 Hamza Karim 1 Nghia T Nguyen 1 Yasin Yilmaz 1

## Abstract 

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is a fundamen-tal challenge in computer vision, particularly due to the open-set nature of anomalies. While re-cent training-free approaches utilizing Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have shown promise, they typically rely on massive, resource-intensive foundation models to compensate for the ambi-guity of static prompts. We argue that the bot-tleneck in VAD is not necessarily model capac-ity, but rather the static nature of inquiry. We propose QVAD, a question-centric agentic frame-work that treats VLM-LLM interaction as a dy-namic dialogue. By iteratively refining queries based on visual context, our LLM agent guides smaller VLMs to produce high-fidelity captions and precise semantic reasoning without param-eter updates. This “prompt-updating” mecha-nism effectively unlocks the latent capabilities of lightweight models, enabling state-of-the-art performance on UCF-Crime, XD-Violence, and UBNormal using a fraction of the parameters re-quired by competing methods. We further demon-strate exceptional generalizability on the single-scene ComplexVAD dataset. Crucially, QVAD achieves high inference speeds with minimal memory footprints, making advanced VAD capa-bilities deployable on resource-constrained edge devices. 

## 1. Introduction 

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is a critical component of intelligent surveillance systems, yet it remains a persis-tent challenge due to the unbounded and open-set nature of what constitutes an “anomaly.” Traditional specialist 

> 1

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA. Correspondence to: Lokman Bekit 

<lbekit@usf.edu >, Hamza Karim <hamzakarim@usf.edu >,Nghia T Nguyen <nghianguyen@usf.edu >, Yasin Yilmaz 

<yasiny@usf.edu >.

Preprint. April 6, 2026. 

models, while efficient, are brittle; they rely on extensive domain-specific supervision and fail to generalize to new en-vironments without expensive retraining. To overcome this, recent paradigms have shifted toward training-free methods leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models (VLMs). While effective, these frameworks typically suffer from a dual burden: they rely on static prompts (e.g., “Is there an anomaly?”) and, consequently, require massive parameter counts to interpret complex temporal dynamics correctly. In standard approaches like LAVAD (Zanella et al., 2024), the lack of prompt specificity forces the reliance on heavy, dis-tinct foundation models to handle ambiguity. This confines training-free VAD to server-grade hardware, disallowing edge deployment. We propose that the key to practical VAD lies not in scaling up model size, but in scaling up the quality of interaction. We introduce QVAD, a Question-Centric Agentic Frame-work that bridges the performance gap for lightweight mod-els through inference-time optimization. Our core hypoth-esis is that smaller VLMs yield significantly better visual reasoning when the prompt is structurally optimized. In-stead of a one-shot query, QVAD treats the VAD process as a dynamic dialogue and can be interpreted as an instance of active multimodal inference, where the LLM selects ques-tions as actions to reduce uncertainty over anomaly hy-potheses. Unlike prior static prompting approaches, QVAD implements a closed-loop perception system. This itera-tive prompt updating allows a 2–4 billion parameter model to extract visual evidence with a level of nuance typically reserved for larger models. We validate QVAD on major benchmarks including UCF-Crime, XD-Violence, and UBNormal, achieving state-of-the-art results. Furthermore, we evaluate our framework on the challenging ComplexVAD (Mumcu et al., 2025a) dataset, demonstrating successful generalization to the spe-cific context-dependent anomalies of a single-scene environ-ment. Most importantly, our ablation studies confirm that QVAD democratizes access to advanced VAD. By achieving high accuracy with compact models (e.g., Qwen-1.7B), our framework operates within a memory footprint as low as 

4.20 GB. This efficiency confirms that QVAD is not only 1

> arXiv:2604.03040v1 [cs.CV] 3 Apr 2026 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection

accurate but uniquely viable for real-world deployment on edge computing platforms like the NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano. Our main contributions are as follows: • Dynamic Question Refinement: We introduce an inference-time mechanism in which an LLM-based agent adaptively updates VLM prompts on-the-fly, maximizing information retrieval in ambiguous or un-certain scenes. • Efficient Deployment: We show that the proposed agentic loop maintains strong performance when paired with smaller foundation models, effectively de-mocratizing access to state-of-the-art video anomaly detection (VAD) capabilities. • Generalization to Open-Set Scenarios: We demon-strate that QVAD successfully generalizes to the context-dependent characteristics of a practical single-scene environment. 

## 2. Related Work 

The field of Video Anomaly Detection has evolved from reconstruction-based deep learning methods to recent training-free approaches leveraging multimodal foundation models. This section reviews the progression of these methodologies, focusing on prompt optimization, struc-tural video understanding, open world methods, and agentic frameworks. 

2.1. Training-Dependent VAD 

Traditional Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) predominantly relies on reconstruction errors or discriminative learning, op-erating with varying degrees of supervision—ranging from weakly-supervised approaches (Tian et al., 2021; Karim et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024b; 2020b) to fully unsupervised methods (Qi et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Al-Lahham et al., 2024; Ristea et al., 2024). More recent efforts have begun to explore semi-supervised and hybrid SSL–LLM paradigms to mitigate this limitation, leveraging multimodal semantic descriptions and language-guided reasoning to improve interpretability and robustness in complex anomaly scenarios (Mumcu et al., 2025b; Hem-matyar et al., 2025). While these methods achieve high performance within closed domains, they suffer from poor generalization to unseen environments. To address this, recent weakly-supervised methods have begun integrating Vision-Language Models (VLMs). For example, VadCLIP (Wu et al., 2024b) adapts a frozen CLIP model by introducing learnable temporal adapters and prompt vectors. However, despite leveraging VLM fea-tures, VadCLIP remains fundamentally training-dependent; it requires domain-specific training data to align visual and textual modalities, thereby restricting its zero-shot transfer-ability to novel anomaly types. 

2.2. From Offline Optimization to Inference-Time Reasoning 

The shift towards training-free VAD aims to leverage the native zero-shot capabilities of VLMs (e.g., CLIP, InternVL) without requiring parameter updates or domain-specific data. Early attempts, such as (Zanella et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2025) utilized frozen VLMs with static captions. However, these methods often fail to capture subtle temporal anoma-lies due to the “semantic gap” between generic pre-training data and specific anomaly definitions. To bridge this gap, recent frameworks have integrated com-plex reasoning chains. However, distinct from our approach, these methods effectively reintroduce a dependency on train-ing data. For instance, VERA (Ye et al., 2025) proposes “Verbalized Learning,” a framework that decomposes rea-soning into guiding questions. Crucially, VERA is not training-free; it optimizes these questions offline using a learner-optimizer loop driven by coarse video-level labels from a training set. Similarly, while Holmes-VAD (Zhang et al., 2025) utilizes Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) for gran-ular analysis, it relies on a multi-stage supervised train-ing pipeline. Specifically, Holmes-VAD trains a dedicated anomaly scorer using annotated frame-level labels (e.g., from HIVAU-70k) and subsequently fine-tunes the MLLM via LoRA to align it with instruction data. This reliance on supervised fine-tuning and large-scale annotated datasets fundamentally separates it from zero-shot paradigms. In contrast, our framework eliminates the need for both pa-rameter updates (as in Holmes-VAD) and offline prompt optimization (as in VERA). We employ inference-time re-finement, generating an adaptive questioning strategy dy-namically. This allows our model to construct the most relevant questions for each specific video instance on the fly, akin to an active sensing strategy, without ever seeing the source distribution or requiring annotated supervision. 

2.3. Open-Vocabulary and Generalist VAD 

Research has increasingly prioritized generalizability to han-dle open-set anomalies. Open-Vocabulary Video Anomaly Detection (OVVAD) (Wu et al., 2024a) addresses the “un-seen anomaly” challenge via a two-stage pipeline: detecting generic anomalies first, then classifying them using seman-tic knowledge. While effective, OVVAD treats detection and semantic classification as decoupled tasks. Our framework unifies these processes through integrated natural language dialogue, allowing detection to be directly guided by seman-tic reasoning. 2QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection      

> Figure 1. Overview of the proposed QVAD framework. The VLM and LLM agents engage in an iterative dialogue, where the LLM generates a query qtconditioned on the captions Ctproduced by the VLM and directs it back to the VLM. This feedback loop progressively refines their shared understanding of the scene

Similarly, “Follow the Rules” (Yang et al., 2024) explores agentic reasoning by translating normality definitions into textual rules for an LLM verification. However, this ap-proach relies on static rule sets. Our work advances this paradigm by making the “rules”, formulated as guiding questions, dynamic; our agent iteratively evolves its inquiry based on the unfolding visual context, a capability essential for identifying context-dependent irregularities. 

2.4. Structural and Agentic Video Understanding 

Two recent methods address the complexity of long-term video dependencies. VADTree (Li et al., 2025) focuses on structural reasoning, proposing a Hierarchical Granularity-aware Tree to organize video segments into clusters for multi-scale analysis. While VADTree optimizes tempo-ral structure, PANDA (Yang et al., 2025b) explores agentic structure, deploying a comprehensive “AI Engineer” capable of planning, tool use (e.g., web search), and self-reflection. However, PANDA achieves performance at the cost of sig-nificant system complexity and latency. Our work strikes a critical balance: we adopt an agentic stance where the LLM actively reasons and plans, but we constrain the action space to iterative question refinement. This yields the adaptabil-ity of complex agents like PANDA while maintaining the efficiency required for practical deployment. 

## 3. Method 

We propose a Question-centric agentic framework for Video Anomaly Detection (QVAD). Unlike traditional methods that rely on static visual features or fixed text prompts, our approach models anomaly detection as a dynamic, multi-turn dialogue between a visual perception module (VLM) and a reasoning agent (LLM) as shown in Figure 1. Figure 2 shows a more detailed illustration of the QVAD architecture. Let a video sequence be denoted by V =

{f1, f 2, . . . , f T }, where fi represents the i-th frame. We process the video through a pre-processing step using a sliding window approach with a window size of w = 128 

frames and a stride of s = 64 frames. For a given temporal window Wt = {ft, . . . , f t+127 }, our goal is to derive an anomaly score yt ∈ [0 , 1] and a corresponding semantic explanation. 

3.1. Two-Stage Spatiotemporal Abstraction 

To efficiently capture both long-term temporal context and fine-grained motion dynamics within the window Wt, we employ a cascaded frame selection strategy. Direct process-ing of all 128 frames in Wt is computationally prohibitive for VLMs; however, random or purely uniform sampling risks missing transient anomalies (e.g., a sudden snatch-and-grab). Algorithm 3 in Appendix and Figure 2 detail the extraction of relevant frames in the pre-processing stage. 

Stage 1: Uniform Temporal Coverage. First, we convert the image to grayscale and reduce the redundancy of high-FPS video by uniformly sampling a set of candidate frames 

Suni to ensure temporal coverage across the entire window: 

Suni = {ft+i·∆ : i ∈ { 0, . . . , N uni − 1}} (1) where Nuni = 32 is the budget for the uniform sampler and ∆ = w/N uni . This reduces the input from 128 frames to a manageable 32 frames while maintaining the temporal breadth of the window. 

Stage 2: Motion-Aware Salience Selection. From Suni ,we select a final subset Smotion of Nvlm = 8 frames that exhibit the highest salient motion. We define the mo-tion saliency mi using the mean intensity of the Gaussian-blurred difference between consecutive frames: 

mi = 1

H × W

X

> x,y

|Gσ (fi(x, y )) − Gσ (fi+1 (x, y )) | (2) where H and W are the height and width of the frame, x, y 

are pixel coordinates and Gσ denotes a Gaussian smoothing filter. We retain the first and last frames of Suni to preserve boundary context and select the remaining 6 frames with the highest mi scores. This yields the final visual input tensor 

Xt = Smotion (where |Xt| = 8 ), ensuring the VLM attends to the most dynamic segments of the window. 3QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection  

> Figure 2. Detailed architecture of the proposed QVAD framework.

3.2. Iterative Agentic Reasoning 

The core of our framework is an iterative dialogue loop where an LLM Agent ( A) refines its understanding of the visual input Xt by querying a VLM Perception module ( P). 

Initialization. At turn k = 0 , the perception module gener-ates an initial comprehensive caption Ct based on a broad system prompt Pinit (e.g., “Describe the persons, actions, and interactions”): 

Ct = P(Xt, P init ) (3) 

The Reasoning Loop. The LLM agent first assesses the probability of an anomaly based on the current context. The agent outputs a tuple (gkt , p kt , R kt ) = A(Ct, Ht, ctx ),

k = 0 , 1, . . . , where gkt ∈ { 0, 1} is the binary anomaly pre-diction, pkt is the anomaly probability, Rkt is the reasoning, 

Ht = {(qkt , a kt ) : k = 1 , . . . , K } is the conversation his-tory from all turns, consisting of the accumulated question-answer pairs, and ctx is the context retrieved from vector memory (Eq. (6)). If the probability pkt is below a threshold θ, the agent initi-ates the next turn by formulating a clarifying question qk+1 

> t

to resolve ambiguity. Crucially, this question is conditioned on the previous dialogue and the specific ambiguity detected in Rkt :

qk+1  

> t

= A(Ct, Ht, R kt , p kt , g kt ). (4) The VLM then provides a targeted answer ak+1  

> t

, attending specifically to the visual regions relevant to qk+1  

> t

based on a prompt (Pf ocus ) designed to respond to the question qk+1 :

ak+1  

> t

= P(Xt, q k+1  

> t

, P f ocus ) (5) The history is updated as Ht = Ht ∪ (qk+1  

> t

, a k+1  

> t

), and this process repeats until pkt > θ = 0 .7 or a maximum turn limit 

K is reached. This adaptive mechanism allows the model to distinguish hard negatives (e.g., “running for exercise” vs. “fleeing”) by actively seeking discriminative visual de-tails. The reasoning algorithm is detailed in Algorithm 1 in Appendix. 

3.3. Vector Memory Module 

We implement a Vector Memory module that couples a dense retrieval index I with a metadata storage Mv . The mechanisms for storage and retrieval are formally defined in Algorithm 2 (Appendix). During the storage phase, the agent’s current observation 

Ct, anomaly prediction gkt , and immediate history Ht are concatenated and truncated to a fixed capacity τcap . This text is mapped to a latent vector e ∈ R384 via a pre-trained encoder E and committed to the index. To maintain compu-tational efficiency, the index undergoes a pruning process whenever the storage size exceeds a threshold of τmax .Retrieval is performed via semantic search in the latent space. Given a query, we generate an embedding qe using 

E and identify the top-K nearest neighbors within I based 4QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

on cosine similarity to form the context used by the LLM agent for anomaly predictions: ctx =



Mv(j) : j ∈ arg top-K

> i∈I

cos( qe, ei)



. (6) Rather than returning a fixed number of documents, the system aggregates metadata from the ranked results dynam-ically. This accumulation terminates once the total length of retrieved segments reaches a token budget τctx , ensuring the agent receives maximal relevant context without exceeding the prompt window. 

3.4. Post Processing Frame-level anomaly score generation. For each win-dow Wt, the model outputs a binary prediction gt ∈ { 0, 1}

and an anomaly probability pt ∈ [0 , 1] after last turn. Since consecutive windows overlap, each frame fi can belong to multiple windows. Let 

T (i) = {t : fi ∈ W t}

denote the set of all windows covering frame fi. We aggre-gate the window-level outputs into frame-level predictions by max pooling over the overlapping windows: 

gi = max   

> t∈T (i)

gt, pi = max   

> t∈T (i)

pt.

This aggregation preserves the strongest anomaly evidence in overlapping regions, ensuring that a frame is considered anomalous if any of its associated temporal contexts indi-cates high anomaly confidence. We then apply the following weighting strategy to compute a calibrated frame-level score 

Li as 

Li =

(

max( pi, α ), if gi = 1 ,

min( pi, α ), if gi = 0 , (7) where α is a hyper-parameter that enforces a lower bound on the confidence for anomalous clips and an upper bound on the anomaly score for normal clips. This prevents sup-pression or amplification of anomaly scores. Next, we apply a multi-scale Gaussian smoothing opera-tion to capture temporal consistency. Let Gσ1 (·) denote a Gaussian convolution with variance σ1. The smoothed frame-level scores are given by 

˜Li = Gσ1 (Li). (8) Finally, we refine the scores using the frame-level anomaly scoring method proposed in Vera et al. , which further en-forces temporal smoothness and robustness via another Gaussian kernel with variance σ2. Denoting this operation by Vσ2 (·), the final frame-level anomaly score is computed as 

ˆpi = Vσ2 ( ˜Li). (9) 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Experimental Setup Datasets. We evaluate QVAD on four diverse benchmarks to assess generalizability across real-world, synthetic, and long-form video scenarios. UCF-Crime (Sultani et al., 2018) and XD-Violence (Wu et al., 2020b) serve as stan-dard benchmarks for real-world surveillance, containing anomalies such as abuse, fighting, and theft. To test open-set adaptability, we utilize UBNormal (Acsintoae et al., 2022) and ComplexVAD (Mumcu et al., 2025a), a recently introduced single-scene dataset that challenges models with long-temporal contexts and subtle, non-binary anomalies. 

Metrics. Following standard protocols, we report the Receiver Operating Characteristic Area Under the Curve (AUC) for frame-level anomaly detection on UCF-Crime, UBNormal, and ComplexVAD. For XD-Violence, we report Average Precision (AP), consistent with prior literature. 

Implementation. All evaluations were conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU. Our primary results are obtained using compact models. Our default configuration pairs a standard Qwen3 4B LLM agent with a Qwen3 4B VLM (Bai et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025a), resulting in a total parameter count of approximately 8B. Optimal values for σ1, σ2 and α for each dataset are given in Table 13 in the appendix. To rigorously evaluate deployment feasibility, we test two inference strategies: 1. Standard Pipeline: Both the LLM and VLM are loaded simultaneously into VRAM to maxi-mize throughput. 2. Memory-Optimized Pipeline: Models are sequentially loaded and offloaded (VLM → Inference 

→ Offload → LLM), minimizing peak memory usage at the cost of latency. 

4.2. Results 

We compare QVAD against state-of-the-art training-free frameworks, including LAVAD, Panda, and VADTree. As shown in Table 1 and Table 2, QVAD achieves competi-tive or superior performance across all benchmarks while utilizing significantly fewer computational resources. On UCF-Crime, QVAD achieves an AUC of 84.28%, effec-tively matching the performance of Panda and VADTree and outperforming LAVAD (80.28%) by a significant margin, de-spite its significantly smaller parameter footprint. Similarly, 5QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection Input Scene Turn 0: Static Baseline (Failure) Turn 1: QVAD Agentic Refinement (Success) Arrest07  VLM Caption: “One person sitting on floor... two others standing over them.” 

LLM Reasoning: “No explicit indi-cation of violence... likely a potential escalation but no immediate danger.” 

Prediction: Normal Agent Query (T1): “Is the seated person being physically restrained or threatened?” 

VLM Response: “Yes, the seated person is being physically re-strained.” 

LLM Re-eval: “Physical restraint meets criteria for Assault.” 

Prediction: Anomalous Stealing019  VLM Caption: “Person standing be-side an open driver-side door of a white sedan, holding a long thin object.” 

LLM Reasoning: “Behavior appears ambiguous; no explicit force or threat observed.” 

Prediction: Normal Agent Query (T1): “Is the person deliberately attempting to open or manipulate the door?” 

VLM Response: “No deliberate manipulation observed.” 

Agent Query (T2): “Is the object being inserted into the vehicle?” 

VLM Response: “Yes, deliberate movements into the car are ob-served.” 

LLM Re-eval: “Object insertion into vehicle suggests theft or van-dalism.” 

Prediction: Anomalous 

Figure 3. Qualitative comparison of Static vs. Dynamic Prompting. In Turn 0 (standard VLM prompting), the model captures general scene dynamics but misses fine-grained semantic cues, leading to False Negatives. In Turn 1 or on Turn 2, the QVAD Agent hypothesizes a potential anomaly and generates a targeted query, correcting the prediction without parameter updates. 

Table 1. Performance comparison on UCF-Crime and XD-Violence benchmarks. We report AUC (%) for UCF-Crime and AP (%) for XD-Violence. “Expl.” indicates explainability. METHODS SUPERVISION EXPL . UCF XD (AUC) (AP) 

Specialized 

HL-N ET WEAK × 82.44 73.67 RTFM WEAK × 84.30 77.81 VAD CLIP WEAK × 88.02 84.51 VERA WEAK ✓ 86.55 70.11 HOLMES -VAU INSTRU . ✓ 88.96 87.68 

Training-free 

LAVAD TRAIN -FREE ✓ 80.28 62.01 EVENT VAD TRAIN -FREE ✓ 82.03 64.04 PANDA TRAIN -FREE ✓ 84.89 70.16 VADT REE TRAIN -FREE ✓ 84.74 68.85 

QVAD TRAIN -FREE ✓ 84.28 68.53 

on XD-Violence, we achieve 68.53% AP, demonstrating robust detection of violent events. Our method excels in open-set scenarios. On UBNormal (Table 2), QVAD achieves a state-of-the-art AUC of 79.6%, surpassing Panda (75.78%) and LAVAD (64.23%). This indicates that our dynamic questioning mechanism adapts to ”unknown” anomalies better than static prompting ap-proaches, which tend to overfit to standard anomaly def-initions. Furthermore, on the challenging ComplexVAD dataset, QVAD achieves 68.02% AUC, demonstrating its ability to maintain and refine contextual understanding over extended temporal windows. For comparison, we addition-ally implement VadTree on those datasets, obtaining AUC scores of 65.80% on UBNormal and 54.20% on Complex-VAD. Detailed implementation specifics for VadTree are 

Table 2. Performance comparison on UBNormal (UB) and Com-plexVAD (CVAD) benchmarks. We report AUC (%) for both datasets. METHODS SUPERVISION EXPL . UB CVAD (AUC) (AUC) 

Specialized 

RTFM WEAK × 64.94 –HYCOVAD SSL ✓ – 72.5 MLLM-EVAD SEMI ✓ – 71.0 HOLMES -VAU INSTRU . ✓ 56.77 –

Training-free 

LAVAD TRAIN -FREE ✓ 64.23 –FOLLOW THE RULES TRAIN -FREE ✓ 71.90 –PANDA TRAIN -FREE ✓ 75.78 –VADT REE TRAIN -FREE ✓ 65.80 54.20 

QVAD TRAIN -FREE ✓ 79.6 68.02 

provided in Appendix B.9. We further present a qualitative analysis to illustrate the ef-fectiveness of the proposed method. Figure 3 demonstrates the efficacy of the agentic framework in QVAD. Although the LLM initially fails to identify the anomaly, the agentic refinement process enables the system to iteratively update its hypotheses and progressively improve its reasoning, ulti-mately leading to accurate anomaly recognition. Similarly, Figure 4 presents representative examples of anomaly scores (ˆ pt) plotted against the frame index, to-gether with the corresponding reasoning Rt, for test videos sampled from the UCF-Crime and XD-Violence datasets. These results reveal a strong correlation between the pre-dicted anomaly score ˆpt and the generated reasoning Rt,indicating that higher anomaly probability is consistently 6QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection                            

> Figure 4. Examples of anomaly scores and reasoning for videos from UCF-Crime and XD-Violence test set.
> Table 3. Comparison with state-of-the-art methods in terms of model size and estimated GPU memory requirements. LPM de-notes the largest parameterized model used by each method. Method Total Params (B) LPM (B) ≈Min. GPU LAVAD 79.60 13.0 30 (GB) Panda N/A N/A 48 (GB) VAD Tree 22.20 14.0 32 (GB)
> QVAD (Ours) 8.02 4.0 9 (GB)
> Note: The parameter count of the Gemini 2.0 Flash model used in Panda is not publicly available; therefore, we report the GPU memory of the hardware used in their experiments (NVIDIA A6000, 48 GB). The minimum GPU memory corresponds to a conservative estimate required to safely run the largest model component (LPM) of each method.
> Table 4. Ablation study on UBNormal (UB) AUC with different models and their GPU memory usage observed with the Memory-Optimized Pipeline. Models QWEN3-VL-4B QWEN3-VL-2B QWEN3-4B 79.60 (8.56 GB) 77.76 (8.36 GB) QWEN3-1.7B 75.92 (8.56 GB) 73.88 (4.20 GB)

aligned with more salient, coherent, and semantically mean-ingful reasoning. 

4.3. Efficiency and Edge Deployment 

The primary contribution of QVAD extends beyond detec-tion accuracy to the efficiency required for practical deploy-ment. In Table 3, we contrast our approach against state-of-the-art methods that suffer from prohibitive computational costs and latency. Our Standard Pipeline operates at an average of 5.98 FPS        

> Table 5. Ablation study on UCF-Crime (UCF) AUC with different model combinations under the Memory-Optimized Pipeline. Models QWEN3-VL-4B QWEN3-VL-2B QWEN3-4B 84.28 81.51 QWEN3-1.7B 83.12 83.75

using the 4B/4B configuration, increasing to 6.19 FPS when utilizing the lighter 1.7B/2B variant on a single NVIDIA RTX 5090 across the entire UCF-Crime dataset. To ensure a fair comparison, it is crucial to contextualize the hardware setups of competing methods: • Panda relies on API-based calls to massive foundation models ( ≈80B parameters). They report 0.82 FPS which stems from both the immense computational cost of the model and the inevitable network latency. • VADTree , when evaluated on the same RTX 5090 GPU, we achieved 1.98 FPS. We also evaluate the Memory-Optimized Pipeline , specif-ically designed for hardware with limited VRAM. By se-quentially loading and offloading the VLM and LLM, we achieve the minimal GPU memory footprints reported in Table 3 and Table 4 (e.g., 4.20 GB for the 1.7B/2B variant and ≈ 9 GB for 4B/4B variant). While this swapping pro-cess introduces a marginal latency overhead (dropping the average speed to 5.89 FPS for the 4B/4B configuration), the trade-off is negligible. This optimization allows QVAD to run on consumer-grade edge device hardware (e.g., NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano), maintaining real-time capabilities in en-vironments where competitors like VADTree and Panda simply cannot function. 7QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection                                  

> Table 6. Ablation study for number of turns. Turns UCF XD UB CVAD (AUC) (AP) (AUC) (AUC) 077.23 68.23 77.95 49.81 182.18 68.73 78.20 49.67 284.28 68.53 79.6 68.02
> Table 7. Ablation study on UCF (AUC) Configuration Vec Sel UCF (AUC) QVAD (Vec+Sel) ✓✓84.28
> QVAD (Sel) ×✓82.35 QVAD (Base) ××81.67

4.4. Ablation Study Efficiency vs. Performance. To further demonstrate the viability of QVAD for resource-constrained edge devices, we evaluate the performance of smaller backbone configu-rations. Table 4 and Table 5 present the results of deploy-ing QVAD with compact model variants (Qwen3-1.7B and Qwen3-VL-2B). Remarkably, the 1.7B/2B configuration retains strong per-formance (83.75% and 73.88% AUC on UCF Crime and UBNormal respectively) while requiring only 4.20 GB of GPU memory using our Memory-Optimized pipeline. This footprint is well within the specifications of embedded AI computers such as the NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano (8GB), validating QVAD as a feasible solution for real-time, on-device video anomaly detection. Although the performance of 1.7B/2B configuration seems to be unexpectedly a little higher than the 1.7B/4B and 4B/2B versions, the difference is statistically insignificant. 

LLM-VLM Dialogue Turns. The ablation study on dia-logue iterations (Table 6) substantiates the core hypothesis of our agentic framework: the VLM’s detection capability is strictly enhanced by the LLM’s guided inquiries. We observe a clear performance progression from the static baseline (Turn 0) to the refined state (Turn 2), though the magnitude of improvement is contingent on the anomaly’s complexity. For XD-Violence, the gains are marginal, suggesting a “sat-uration effect”. The anomalies in this domain (e.g., explo-sions, fighting) are visually salient, allowing the VLM to resolve them with minimal reasoning depth. In stark con-trast, in ComplexVAD a non-linear performance jump is observed. Accuracy remains stagnant at Turn 1 but surges dramatically at Turn 2 (from ≈50% to 68% AUC). This indicates that for subtle, long-term anomalies, a single ex-ploratory question is insufficient; the agent requires a multi-step deductive chain to formulate a precise hypothesis that isolates the irregularity. We limit the interaction to Turn 2 as a strategic design choice. Extending the dialogue further induces substantial growth in the Key-Value (KV) cache, resulting in prohibitive latency and memory overhead. 

Impact of Vector Memory and Selection. We first isolate the contributions of our core components: the Vector Mem-ory module (Vec), which retains long-term temporal context, and the motion aware frame selection (Sel), which filters irrelevant frames or queries. As shown in the first section of Table 6, the baseline model achieves 81.67% AUC when tested on UCF-Crime. Introducing the Selection Mechanism improves performance to 82.35%, validating that filtering noise is beneficial. However, the integration of the Vector Memory yields the most significant gain, boosting AUC to 84.28%. This confirms that for long-form video anomaly de-tection, immediate visual context is insufficient; the ability to recall and correlate past events via vector-based retrieval is essential for identifying complex anomalies. 

## 5. Discussion 

Potential for Acceleration via KV Caching. While our current implementation utilizes standard autoregressive in-ference, the iterative structure of our framework is uniquely positioned to capitalize on emerging research in Key-Value (KV) cache optimization. A substantial computational cost in multi-turn VLM systems is the redundant re-processing of high-dimensional visual features ( Xt) at every dialogue turn. Our method is architecturally aligned with recent advances in efficient attention mechanisms, such as PagedAttention (Kwon et al., 2023). By persisting the attention states of the visual encoding and dialogue history Ht, future implemen-tations could eliminate the quadratic cost of re-tokenizing the context window. This implies that as the domain of memory-efficient inference matures, our agentic approach will naturally scale to achieve significantly lower latency compared to static prompting baselines, where such state persistence is less effective. 

Scalable Context with Vector Spaces. Furthermore, the integration of a vector-based memory module aligns with the growing trend of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) in efficient ML. By offloading long-term temporal depen-dencies to a compressed vector space rather than extending the active context window, we maintain a bounded memory footprint even as video duration increases. This combina-tion of retrieval-based long-term history and the potential for cached short-term dialogue offers a promising path toward real-time, long-context video understanding on resource-constrained hardware. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We presented QVAD, a question-centric agentic framework for training-free video anomaly detection that addresses the 8QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

limitations of static prompting with smaller models through dynamic, context-aware query refinement. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple bench-marks through iterative question-answer interactions be-tween LLM and VLM agents, while remaining practical for deployment on edge devices due to its significantly lower parameter count. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning, specifically in video anomaly detec-tion. Our training-free approach reduces computational requirements and improves accessibility to advanced VAD capabilities. While our method has potential applications in surveillance and security, we acknowledge the impor-tance of responsible deployment with appropriate privacy safeguards and human oversight. There are many poten-tial societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here beyond the standard considerations for video analysis systems. 

## References 

Acsintoae, A., Florescu, A., Georgescu, M. I., Mare, T., Sumedrea, P., Ionescu, R. T., Khan, F. S., and Shah, M. Ubnormal: New benchmark for supervised open-set video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 20143–20153, 2022. Al-Lahham, A., Zaheer, M. Z., Tastan, N., and Nandaku-mar, K. Collaborative learning of anomalies with privacy (clap) for unsupervised video anomaly detection: A new baseline. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 12416– 12425, 2024. Bai, S., Cai, Y., Chen, R., Chen, K., Chen, X., Cheng, Z., and Zhu, K. Q. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 , 2025. Chen, J., Li, L., Su, L., Zha, Z.-j., and Huang, Q. Prompt-enhanced multiple instance learning for weakly super-vised video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 18319–18329, 2024. Hemmatyar, M. M., Jafari, M., Yousefi, M. A., Nemati, M. R., Azadani, M., Rastad, H. R., and Akbari, A. Hyco-vad: A hybrid ssl-llm model for complex video anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22544 , 2025. Karim, H., Doshi, K., and Yilmaz, Y. Real-time weakly su-pervised video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision , pp. 6848–6856, 2024. Kwon, W., Li, Z., Zhuang, S., Sheng, Y., Zheng, L., Yu, C. H., Gonzalez, J., Zhang, H., and Stoica, I. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th sym-posium on operating systems principles , pp. 611–626, 2023. 9QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

Li, W., Xu, Y., Rao, Y., Wang, Z., and Deng, S. VADTree: Explainable training-free video anomaly detection via hierarchical granularity-aware tree. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22693 , 2025. Mumcu, F., Jones, M., Yilmaz, Y., and Cherian, A. Com-plexvad: Detecting interaction anomalies in video. In 

Proceedings of the Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pp. 1093–1102, 2025a. Mumcu, F., Jones, M. J., Cherian, A., and Yilmaz, Y. Lever-aging multimodal llm descriptions of activity for explain-able semi-supervised video anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14896 , 2025b. Qi, X., Chao, X., Ji, G., and Li, L. Time-efficient video anomaly detection with parallel computing and twice-reconstruction. IEEE Sensors Journal , 2025. Ristea, N.-C., Croitoru, F.-A., Ionescu, R. T., Popescu, M., Khan, F. S., Shah, M., et al. Self-distilled masked auto-encoders are efficient video anomaly detectors. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 15984–15995, 2024. Shao, Y., He, H., Li, S., Chen, S., Long, X., Zeng, F., and Li, S. Eventvad: Training-free event-aware video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pp. 2586–2595, 2025. Sultani, W., Chen, C., and Shah, M. Real-world anomaly de-tection in surveillance videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 6479–6488, 2018. Tian, Y., Pang, G., Chen, Y., Singh, R., Verjans, J. W., and Carneiro, G. Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal feature magnitude learning. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 4975–4986, 2021. Wu, P., Liu, J., Shi, Y., Sun, Y., Shao, F., Wu, Z., and Yang, Z. Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal violence detection under weak supervision. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pp. 322–339, 2020a. Wu, P., Liu, J., Shi, Y., Sun, Y., Shao, F., Wu, Z., and Yang, Z. Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal violence detection under weak supervision. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pp. 322–339, 2020b. Wu, P., Zhou, X., Pang, G., Sun, Y., Liu, J., Wang, P., and Zhang, Y. Open-vocabulary video anomaly detec-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 18297–18307, 2024a. Wu, P., Zhou, X., Pang, G., Zhou, L., Yan, Q., Wang, P., and Zhang, Y. VADCLIP: Adapting vision-language mod-els for weakly supervised video anomaly detection. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 38, pp. 6074–6082, 2024b. Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., and Qiu, Z. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025a. Yang, Y., Lee, K., Dariush, B., Cao, Y., and Lo, S. Y. Follow the rules: Reasoning for video anomaly detection with large language models. In European Conference on Com-puter Vision (ECCV) , pp. 304–322, Cham, 2024. Springer Nature Switzerland. Yang, Z., Gao, C., and Shou, M. Z. PANDA: Towards gen-eralist video anomaly detection via agentic AI engineer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26386 , 2025b. Ye, M., Liu, W., and He, P. VERA: Explainable video anomaly detection via verbalized learning of vision-language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 8679–8688, 2025. Zanella, L., Menapace, W., Mancini, M., Wang, Y., and Ricci, E. Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 18527–18536, 2024. Zhang, H., Xu, X., Wang, X., Zuo, J., Huang, X., Gao, C., and Sang, N. Holmes-VAU: Towards long-term video anomaly understanding at any granularity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 13843–13853, 2025. Zhang, M., Wang, J., Qi, Q., Sun, H., Zhuang, Z., Ren, P., Ma, R., and Liao, J. Multi-scale video anomaly detection by multi-grained spatio-temporal representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 17385–17394, 2024. 10 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection                           

> Table 8. Ablation study on window size and stride on UCF (AUC) Configuration Window / Stride UCF (AUC) QVAD 64 / 32 81.92 QVAD 128 / 64 84.28
> QVAD 256 / 128 83.00
> Table 9. Ablation study on number of frames on UCF (AUC) Configuration # Frames UCF (AUC) QVAD 479.30 QVAD 884.28
> QVAD 16 83.10
> Table 10. Ablation study on confidence threshold θ(AUC UBnormal) Confidence Threshold θAUC UBnormal (%) 0.6 66.30 0.7 79.60
> 0.8 65.56

## A. Additional Experimental Results 

To provide a comprehensive understanding of the QVAD framework, we conduct extended ablation studies focusing on component contributions, hyperparameter sensitivity, and the stochastic stability of the agentic dialogue. 

A.1. Component Analysis and Hyperparameter Sensitivity Temporal Granularity (Window Size). We analyze the impact of the temporal window size on detection performance. A window size of 128 frames (stride 64) proves optimal (84.28% AUC). Smaller windows (64 frames) fail to capture sufficient temporal context for slowly evolving anomalies (81.92%), while larger windows (256 frames) introduce excessive irrelevant information, diluting the anomaly signal (83.00%). 

Visual Density (Number of Frames). Similarly, we examine the number of frames sampled per window. We find that 

8 frames provide the optimal balance between information density and reasoning clarity. Using only 4 frames results in a significant performance drop (79.30%), as the VLM misses critical motion cues. Conversely, increasing the sample to 16 frames (83.10%) degrades performance, likely due to information redundancy overwhelming the small VLM’s context window without adding semantic value. 

Decision Boundary (Confidence Threshold θ). Finally, we calibrate the confidence threshold θ that governs the agent’s uncertainty mechanism. We select UBnormal for this ablation due to its open-set nature and diverse, subtle anomaly types, which demand a more strictly tuned decision boundary than the often unambiguous crimes in UCF. We observe a distinct performance peak at θ = 0.7 (79.60% AUC). Deviating from this optimum leads to sharp declines: a lower threshold (θ = 0 .6) likely introduces noise by over-querying benign events, while a stricter threshold ( θ = 0 .8) suppresses necessary clarifications for ambiguous anomalies. 11 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

A.2. Stability and Reproducibility 

A common concern with LLM-based agents is the stochastic nature of text generation, which can lead to variance in reasoning paths. To evaluate the robustness of QVAD, we conducted a stability analysis across three independent runs (T1–T3) on both the UCF Crime and UBnormal datasets. As detailed in Table 11, QVAD demonstrates remarkable stability across both benchmarks. On UCF Crime, which features more clear anomalies, the system yields a mean AUC of 84.03% with a minimal standard deviation of 0.204. Crucially, this stability holds even on the UBnormal dataset, whose subtle, open-set anomalies make it a rigorous stress test for generation sensitivity. Here, QVAD achieves a mean AUC of 79.20% with a standard deviation of only 0.283. This consistently low variance ( σ < 0.3) confirms that our “Guiding Question” refinement process converges to reliable reasoning paths, effectively mitigating the inherent non-determinism of the underlying LLM.                 

> Table 11. Stability Analysis on UBnormal (AUC) and UCF (AUC) Dataset T1 T2 T3 Mean STD UCF 83.78 84.28 84.02 84.03 0.204 UB 78.98 79.60 79.02 79.20 0.283

## B. Implementation Details 

This section provides comprehensive algorithmic details of our video anomaly detection pipeline, including the overall architecture, vector memory system, motion-aware frame selection, and the prompting strategies for both the Vision-Language Model (VLM) and Large Language Model (LLM). 

B.1. Overall Pipeline 

Our system employs a multi-turn conversational framework between a VLM and an LLM, augmented with semantic vector memory for temporal context retrieval. Algorithm 1 describes the complete anomaly detection workflow. The E NRICH function concatenates the initial caption, Q&A pairs, and retrieved context under a strict token budget 

τmax = 2048 .

B.2. Motion-Aware Frame Selection 

To efficiently process video while preserving anomaly-relevant content, we employ a two-stage frame selection strategy. First, we uniformly sample 32 frames from the input window to reduce computational load. Then, we apply motion-aware selection to identify the 8 most informative frames, always including the first and last frames for temporal anchoring. 

B.3. Vector Memory System 

To enable temporal reasoning across non-adjacent video segments, we implement a semantic vector memory using sentence embeddings. Each processed scene is stored with its embedding, enabling efficient retrieval of contextually relevant historical observations. 

Parameters: Max memory size Mmax = 400 , max context tokens τctx = 512 , max caption tokens τcap = 150 , retrieval count k = 3 . We use MiniLM-L6-v2 for the encoder E. This choice is critical for our edge-deployment objective: the model provides high-fidelity semantic matching while occupying less than 100MB of memory and offering significantly higher throughput than standard BERT-based encoders. This ensures the retrieval step imposes negligible latency overhead ( ≈ 2ms per query) on the overall inference pipeline. 12 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

Algorithm 1 Video Anomaly Detection Pipeline 

Require: Video windows Wt, maximum turns K

Ensure: Anomaly results {pt, g t, R t}

1: Initialize: Mv ← VectorMemory () 

2: for Wt ∈ V do 

3: Suni ← UNIFORM SAMPLE (Wt, 32) 

4: Xt ← MOTION SELECT (Suni , 8) ▷ Alg. 3 

// Initial captioning and scoring 

5: Ht ← [ ] , t ← 0, k ← 0

6: Ct ← P (Xt, P init )

7: (gkt , p kt , R kt ) ← A (Ct, Ht)

// Iterative refinement loop 

8: while k < K and pt < 0.7 do 

9: qk+1  

> t

← A (Ct, Ht, R kt , g kt , p kt )

10: ctx ← RETRIEVE CONTEXT (qk+1  

> t

, Mv ) ▷ Alg. 2 

11: ak+1  

> t

← P (Xt, q k+1  

> t

, P focus )

12: Ht.append (( qk+1  

> t

, a k+1  

> t

)) 

13: (gk+1  

> t

, p k+1  

> t

, R k+1  

> t

) ← A (Ct, Ht, ctx )

14: k ← k + 1 

15: end while // Update memory and collect results 

16: Mv .add (Ct, g kt , Ht, ctx )

17: end for 

18: return {pkt , g kt , R kt }

Algorithm 2 Vector Memory Operations 

Ensure: : Encoder E, index I, metadata store Mv

1: procedure ADD SCENE (Ct, gkt , Ht, ctx )

2: c′ ← TRUNCATE ((Ct + Ht + ctx ), τ cap )

3: e ← E(c′) ▷ e ∈ R384 

4: I.add (e)

5: Mv.append (c′, g t)

6: if |Mv| > M max then 

7: REBUILD INDEX () ▷ Prune to /2 

8: end if 

9: end procedure 

10: procedure RETRIEVE CONTEXT (query, k)

11: if |I| = 0 then return None 

12: end if 

13: qe ← E(query )

14: J ← I .search (qe, top −K) ▷ top-K

15: result ← [ ] , tokens ← 0

16: for j ∈ J do 

17: entry ← Mv(j)

18: result .append (entry )

19: tokens ← tokens + |entry |

20: if tokens > τ ctx then break 

21: end if 

22: end for 

23: return JOIN (result )

24: end procedure 

13 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

Algorithm 3 Motion-Aware Frame Selection 

Require: Frames Suni = {f1, . . . , f N }, target count T

1: for i = 1 to N − 1 do 

2: gi ← GRAYSCALE (fi)

3: gi+1 ← GRAYSCALE (fi+1 )

4: ˜gi ← GAUSSIAN BLUR (gi, σ )

5: ˜gi+1 ← GAUSSIAN BLUR (gi+1 , σ )

6: D ← | ˜gi+1 − ˜gi|

7: M ← I[D > δ ] ▷ Binary motion mask 

8: mi ← mean (M ) ▷ Normalized motion score 

9: end for 

10: mN ← mN −1 ▷ Copy last score 

11: Select frames: 

12: I ← { 1, N } ▷ Always include first/last 

13: idx ← ARG SORT ({mi}, descending )

14: for j ∈ idx do 

15: if |I| ≥ T then break 

16: end if 

17: I ← I ∪ { j}

18: end for 

19: return {fi : i ∈ SORT (I)}

B.4. VLM Prompting Strategy 

We employ two distinct prompting strategies for the VLM: an initial comprehensive prompt and a focused follow-up prompt. B.4.1. I NITIAL CAPTION PROMPT 

The initial prompt elicits a structured, objective description of the surveillance footage: 

VLM Initial Prompt: 

Analyze this surveillance video sequence. Provide a concise and objective description. Provide a very brief, 2-3 sentence summary of the main event. 1. Persons: How many people are present? 2. Key Actions: Describe the specific, atomic actions of each person (e.g., “walking”, “standing”, “fighting”, “lifting box”) or objects like cars. 3. Object Interactions: What objects is the person (or people) interacting with, and how? 4. Key Visual Details: Note prominent clothing, visible text, or significant nearby objects (like vehicles). Focus ONLY on what you clearly see. Do not interpret intent or state what is not happening. 

B.4.2. F OCUSED RESPONSE PROMPT 

For follow-up questions, we use a constrained prompt to elicit brief, targeted responses: 

VLM Focused Prompt: 

Answer this specific question concisely based on the video frames: 

{question }

1. Answer directly in 1 single sentence if possible (max 2). 2. Be extremely brief. 3. Do not describe the whole scene, only answer the specific question. 

14 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

B.5. LLM Prompting Strategy 

The LLM is employed in two complementary roles: (i) anomaly scoring and (ii) clarifying question generation. While the prompt used for question generation remains fixed across datasets, the anomaly scoring prompt must be adapted to each benchmark due to dataset-specific definitions of anomalous events. In particular, the scope of what constitutes an anomaly and the criteria for assigning an anomaly label (Anomaly = 1) are explicitly customized for each dataset. B.5.1. A NOMALY SCORING SYSTEM PROMPT 

UCF Crime LLM Anomaly Scoring System Prompt: 

You are a highly analytical OBJECTIVE Public Safety & Anomaly Detection AI. Your function is to assess a surveillance video caption for the presence of CRIMES or HAZARDOUS ANOMALIES. 

CRITICAL: BE CONSERVATIVE – Normal activity is FAR MORE COMMON than anomalies. 

STRICT RULES FOR ANOMALY SCORING: 

1. SCOPE: Focus ONLY on: Abuse, Arrest, Arson, Assault, RoadAccidents, Shooting, Shoplifting, Stealing, Vandalism, Fighting, Explosion. 2. FACT-BASED: Analyze the EXPLICIT VISUAL FACTS in the caption. Do not hallucinate danger. 3. ANOMALY = 1 CRITERIA: 

A) HUMAN CRIMINALITY: Punches, kicks, weapons drawn, concealing items, deliberate property damage. B) HAZARDOUS SITUATIONS: Vehicle collisions, abnormal positioning, visible wreckage, explosions, thick smoke, open flames. 4. No Anomaly = 0: Normal traffic, pedestrians walking/running, light fog, regular parking. 5. CONFIDENCE: High (0.8-1.0): explicit crime keywords; Medium (0.5-0.79): suggestive descriptions; Low (0.0-0.49): mostly normal. Respond ONLY in JSON format: 

{‘‘anomaly score’’: 0|1, ‘‘confidence’’: 0.0-1.0, ‘‘reasoning’’: ‘‘...’’, ‘‘crime type’’: ‘‘...’’ }

B.5.2. Q UESTION GENERATION PROMPT 

LLM Question Generation Prompt: 

You are an expert surveillance analyst. When given a video description with uncertain or ambiguous elements, you generate ONE specific, focused question to clarify whether criminal activity is occurring. Your questions should: 1. Target specific ambiguous details (objects, actions, interactions) 2. Help distinguish between normal and criminal behavior 3. Be answerable by observing the video footage 4. Focus on concrete, observable elements 5. Do not ask questions that force VLM to hallucinate a crime If the question needs historical context (e.g., “Are there patterns?”), phrase it naturally – the system will automatically provide relevant context. Generate ONLY the question text, no additional commentary. 

B.5.3. A NOMALY DEFINITION ON OTHER DATASETS 

To accommodate varying definitions of “anomaly,” we utilize dataset-specific instructions.         

> ComplexVAD System Prompt Definitions: CRITICAL: Judge ONLY explicit actions. Ignore intent/legality/realness. Anomaly = deviation from normal object-object or human-object interaction .
> Scoring Rules:
> •Anomaly = 1: Clearly abnormal interaction, collision, abandonment, blocking, autonomous object motion, or unusual path/stop. •Anomaly = 0: Normal movement, normal object use, or ambiguous activity.
> Examples of Anomaly = 1: 1. Person leaves object and walks away. 2. Unexpected collision. 3. Person blocks vehicle. 4. Object moves without human. 5. Sudden unusual stop/turn. 6. Unattended objects near road. 7. Vandalism, theft, assault, arson.
> Examples of Anomaly = 0: 1. People walking/running/standing normally. 2. Normal use of objects.

Figure 5. Exact anomaly scoring criteria for ComplexVAD. 

15 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

XD Violence System Prompt Definitions: CRITICAL PRINCIPLES: 1. CONTEXT-AGNOSTIC: Source is IRRELEVANT. Score ONLY action. 2. MULTIMODAL: Consider visual AND audio cues. 3. 

TEMPORAL: ACTIVE violent events only. 

XD-VIOLENCE TAXONOMY - ANOMALY = 1 CRITERIA: 

• A) FIGHTING: Hand-to-hand (punch/kick/grapple); Group brawls; Martial arts (causing harm); Physical assault; Audio: Impact sounds/grunting. • B) SHOOTING: Firearm pointed with intent; Muzzle flash/discharge; Person shot/falling; Active shooter; Audio: Gunshots. • C) EXPLOSION: Visible detonation/blast wave; Large fire/smoke plumes; Debris clouds; Vehicle/building explosions; Audio: Loud bangs. • D) RIOT: Crowd violence/mob attacks; Fighting police; Mass property destruction; Thrown objects; Looting. • E) CAR ACCIDENT: Vehicle-to-vehicle/pedestrian impacts; Flipping/rolling; High-speed crashes; Audio: Crash/screeching. • F) ABUSE: Domestic/child abuse; Physical intimidation; Violent restraint; Aggressive domination; Elder abuse. 

NO ANOMALY = 0: Normal: Walking, talking, shopping. Sports: Organized/gym/training (no harm). Verbal: Arguing (no contact). Ambiguous: Crowds/running (no violence). 

Figure 6. Exact anomaly scoring criteria for XD-Violence. 

Ubnormal System Prompt Definitions: STRICT RULES FOR ANOMALY SCORING — 1. SCOPE: Abuse, Arrest, Arson, Assault, RoadAccidents, Shooting, Shoplifting, Stealing, Vandalism, Fighting, Explosion. 2. FACT-BASED: Analyze ONLY explicit visuals. Do NOT assume intent. Consider duration/obstruction/risk cues. 

3. ANOMALY = 1 (Immediate or Emerging Public Safety Risk) 

• A) HUMAN CRIMINALITY: Assault/Fighting (punches, kicks); Shooting (weapons, panic); Stealing/Burglary (concealment, force); Vandalism. • B) HAZARDOUS SITUATIONS: RoadAccidents: Collision; Vehicle on sidewalk/grass; Blocking active lanes; Stopped in traffic; Visible damage. Explosion/Arson: 

Flash/blast; Thick smoke from fixed location; Open flames; Fleeing smoke. • C) ELEVATED RISK DUE TO PERSISTENCE: Standing/lingering near entrance; Repeated pacing/monitoring; Loitering in roadway causing traffic changes. (Emerging risks only). 

4. NO ANOMALY = 0: Walking/standing briefly; Jogging; Cars at red lights/congestion; Parked legally; Light fog/rain. If persistence/danger not explicit, classify as 0. 

Figure 7. Exact anomaly scoring criteria for UBNormal. 

B.6. Hyperparameters and Configuration 

Table 12 summarizes the key hyperparameters used in our experiments. 

B.7. Parallel Processing Architecture 

To ensure data integrity during parallel processing, we enforce strict isolation between video processing threads: 1. Vector Memory Isolation: Each video receives its own VectorMemory instance, preventing cross-video context contamination. 2. Shared Encoder: The sentence embedding model is loaded once and shared across threads (read-only during inference), reducing memory overhead. 3. Model Locks: Thread-safe locks ( vlm lock , llm lock ) serialize access to the VLM and LLM during generation. This architecture enables efficient parallel processing of multiple videos while guaranteeing zero cross-video data leakage, which is critical for accurate anomaly detection in surveillance applications. 

B.8. Optimizing Post-Processing Parameters 

The hyperparameters σ1, σ2, and α are optimized on the validation set of each dataset (Table 13). Larger values of σ1

are favored for datasets with longer and more complex anomaly durations, indicating the benefit of stronger temporal aggregation, while smaller values preserve sharper transitions for short-lived anomalies. The calibration parameter α used for anomaly score weighting in Eq. (7) adapts to dataset-specific confidence distributions, mitigating over-suppression of anomalous frames and over-amplification of normal ones. Overall, these optimized parameters enable robust yet flexible temporal post-processing across diverse benchmarks. 

B.9. Implementation of VADTree on UBNormal and ComplexVAD 

We first pre-process the UBNormal and CVAD dataset into a unified video directory with associated track annotation files. Temporal boundaries are extracted using EfficientGEBD with a ResNet-18 backbone, initialized from Kinetics-GEBD and 16 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection  

> Table 12. QVAD Hyperparameters

Parameter Symbol Value 

Frame Selection 

Uniform pre-sample count – 32 Motion-aware target count T 8Gaussian blur kernel size σ 21 Motion threshold δ 25 

Token Limits 

Max initial caption tokens – 300 Max VLM answer tokens – 150 Max memory context tokens τctx 512 Max enriched caption tokens τmax 2048 Max stored caption tokens τcap 150 

Conversation Control 

Max conversation turns K 2Confidence threshold θ 0.7 

Vector Memory 

Embedding dimension – 384 Max memory size Mmax 400 Retrieval count k 3

Model Generation 

VLM max new tokens – 512 VLM temperature – 0.7 LLM max new tokens – 512 LLM temperature – 0.3      

> Table 13. Optimal values for hyper-parameters: σ1,σ2and α

UCF-Crime UB-Normal XD-Violence Complex-VAD 

σ1 280 145 142 420 

σ2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.4 

α 0.05 0.2 0.4 0.21 fine-tuned on UBNormal. The model predicts per-frame boundary confidence scores in 100-frame windows and a threshold at 0.5, to form boundary timestamps and grouped into scene segments. These segments are organized into a Hierarchical Graph Tree (HGTree) with coarse nodes capturing long-duration activities and fine nodes modeling short transitions. Redundant nodes are removed, and parent–child relations are built via temporal containment. For each node, motion-aware frame selection produces a compact visual summary by retaining the first and last frames and selecting high-motion frames based on grayscale differencing with Gaussian smoothing. Selected frames are then processed by a VLM (LLaVA-Video-7B-Qwen2) using a static prompt to generate semantic scene descriptions and preliminary anomaly judgments, guided by UBNormal specific priors. The resulting captions are then scored by an LLM (DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B), which assigns anomaly values in [0,1] through structured reasoning. Finally, node-level scores are refined via intra-cluster similarity aggregation using ImageBind features and fused across coarse and fine hierarchies to produce frame-level anomaly predictions. 

## C. Baseline Methods 

We compare QVAD with a diverse set of representative video anomaly detection (VAD) baselines, covering both specialized 

and training-free paradigms. All reported results are taken from the original papers or reproduced using the authors’ released 17 QVAD: Question-Centric Agentic Framework for Video Anomaly Detection 

code and recommended evaluation protocols. 

C.1. Specialized Methods HL-Net (Wu et al., 2020a) 

RTFM (Tian et al., 2021) 

VadCLIP (Wu et al., 2024b) 

VERA (Ye et al., 2025) 

Holmes-VAU (Zhang et al., 2025) 

HyCoVAD (Hemmatyar et al., 2025) 

MLLM-EVAD (Mumcu et al., 2025b) 

C.2. Training-free Methods LAVAD (Zanella et al., 2024) 

EventVAD (Shao et al., 2025) 

PANDA (Yang et al., 2025b) 

VADTree (Li et al., 2025) 

Follow the Rules (Yang et al., 2024) 18