Title: PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08991v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 00:30:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

## Zhiyu Zhou ∗

Jilin University Changchun, China zhouzy1622@mails.jlu.edu.cn 

## Peilin Liu ∗

Jilin University Changchun, China liupl9922@mails.jlu.edu.cn 

## Ruoxuan Zhang 

Jilin University Changchun, China zhangrx25@mails.jlu.edu.cn 

## Luyang Zhang 

Jilin University Changchun, China zhangly1722@mails.jlu.edu.cn 

## Cheng Zhang 

Jilin University Changchun, China zhangcheng2122@mails.jlu.edu.cn 

## Hongxia Xie †

Jilin University Changchun, China hongxiaxie@jlu.edu.cn 

## Wen-Huang Cheng 

National Taiwan University Taipei, China wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw Answer: 

Question:  Please describe in detail the final 

location of the  phone  in the scene, including its 

distance s and relation s to nearby objects.  

> next to the laptop,
> 3 cm away

B.  keyboard 

C.  book 

D. pouch  

> A. laptop

Frame 2 Frame 2  Frame 3 Frame 3 Frame 1  Frame 4 

In struction:  Answer only with exactly one 

word: Yes or No. Do not add any explanation. 

No No Yes Yes 

Question:  In the entire scene, 

did the  phone  appear? 

Question: Excluding the  surface it is resting on, 

which of the following objects is nearest to the final 

location of the phone in this scene? 

A.  laptop  B.  keyboard 

C.  book  D. pouch 

In struction: Choose exactly one option from A, B, C, or D. Output  

> ONLY in the format: X. object name. Do not output any other text.

A.  laptop 

In struction :Output ONLY a valid parsable  JSON  object  

> with fields target, support_surface, and references (0 –2
> items). Each reference must contain object, relation (on,
> under, above, below, side_above, side_below, next_to, near,
> attached_to), and float distance_cm. Sort references by
> distance. No extra text or markdown.

Question: Please output the final location of the    

> phone in structured JSON format.

Answer: {"target":" phone ","support_surface":"desk","reference 

> s":[{"object":" laptop ","relation":"next_to","distance_cm": 3.0 }
> ,{"object":" pouch ","relation":"near","distance_cm": 5.0 }]}

Dataset  Statistics 

Baseline  Performance 

Fine -Grained Spatial Description 

Nearest Reference Identification 

Structured Spatial Prediction 

Target Presence Verification 

near the pouch, 

5 cm away 

Answer: 

# PinpointQA 

Task 1 

ScanNet++ 

ScanNet200 

Source 

Datasets 

102 

Target 

Categories 

102 

Target 

Categories 

1,024 

Scenes 

1,024 

Scenes 

QA Pairs 

10,094 

QA Pairs 

10,094 

Task 2 

Answer: 

Task 4: Task 3: 

Answer:  The  phone  is on the desk. 

It is next to the  laptop , 3 cm away, and 

near the  pouch , 5 cm away. 

Answer:  The  phone  is on the desk. 

It is next to the  laptop , 3 cm away, and 

near the  pouch , 5 cm away. 

In struction:  Use  1–2 natural sentences. Mention 

the support ing  surface and  1–2 nearest objects with exact 

distances in cm. No meters or vague approximations. 

In struction:  Use  1–2 natural sentences. Mention 

the support ing  surface and  1–2 nearest objects with exact 

distances in cm. No meters or vague approximations. 

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed PinpointQA dataset and benchmark. PinpointQA evaluates small object-centric spatial understanding in indoor videos through four tasks: Target Presence Verification (TPV), Nearest Reference Identification (NRI), Fine-Grained Spatial Description (FSD), and Structured Spatial Prediction (SSP). The top row shows an example video sequence, the surrounding panels illustrate task formats, and the center summarizes dataset statistics and min–max normalized baseline performance of representative MLLMs across tasks. 

Abstract 

Small object-centric spatial understanding in indoor videos re-mains a significant challenge for multimodal large language models (MLLMs), despite its practical value for object search and assistive 

∗Equal contribution. 

†Corresponding author. 

applications. Although existing benchmarks have advanced video spatial intelligence, embodied reasoning, and diagnostic perception, no existing benchmark directly evaluates whether a model can local-ize a target object in video and express its position with sufficient precision for downstream use. In this work, we introduce Pin-pointQA , the first dataset and benchmark for small object-centric 

> arXiv:2604.08991v1 [cs.CV] 10 Apr 2026 Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng

spatial understanding in indoor videos. Built from ScanNet++ and ScanNet200, PinpointQA comprises 1,024 scenes and 10,094 QA pairs organized into four progressively challenging tasks: Target Presence Verification (TPV), Nearest Reference Identification (NRI), Fine-Grained Spatial Description (FSD), and Structured Spatial Pre-diction (SSP). The dataset is built from intermediate spatial represen-tations, with QA pairs generated automatically and further refined through quality control. Experiments on representative MLLMs reveal a consistent capability gap along the progressive chain, with SSP remaining particularly difficult. Supervised fine-tuning on Pin-pointQA yields substantial gains, especially on the harder tasks, demonstrating that PinpointQA serves as both a diagnostic bench-mark and an effective training dataset. The dataset and project page are available at https://rainchowz.github.io/PinpointQA. 

1 Introduction 

In everyday environments, users often need more than generic video understanding. What matters is whether a system can reason about a target object: whether it appeared, where it ended up, which nearby objects provide useful cues, and whether this information can be expressed clearly for downstream use [ 3 , 11 ]. This need is especially pronounced for small objects such as keys, earbuds, phones, and chargers. Compared with larger objects, they are less salient, more easily occluded, and more dependent on local con-text for reliable localization. These properties make small objects a distinct challenge for video-based perception and localization, motivating us to study small object-centric spatial understanding in video rather than general video understanding [10]. This problem is also consistent with the basic mechanisms of human visual search. Classical studies show that the visual system does not process all scene information uniformly. Instead, attention is allocated preferentially to goal-relevant regions. During search, people rely on an internal target template and narrow the search space through local cues, rather than by fully encoding the entire scene [ 8, 29 , 30 , 33 ]. For small objects, this means that detecting the target is only the beginning [ 12 ]. A useful system must also identify nearby reference objects and organize these local relations into precise spatial descriptions [ 14 , 17 ]. We therefore model the problem as a progressive capability chain that moves from target perception to reference grounding, fine-grained spatial description, and structured spatial prediction. Recent progress in egocentric and long-video datasets, together with large-scale 3D scene resources with dense geometric and instance-level annotations, has made small object-centric spatial un-derstanding increasingly feasible to study and benchmark [ 6 , 7, 11 ,21 , 24 , 37 ]. Meanwhile, the rapid improvement of multimodal large models has made it increasingly important to systematically evalu-ate their capabilities on this problem [ 1, 2, 26 , 27 , 31 ]. Recent bench-marks have advanced the evaluation of video spatial intelligence, multi-hop spatial reasoning, precise spatial-temporal understand-ing, and embodied spatial understanding [ 9 , 16 , 19 , 32 , 35 , 38 , 42 ]. Small object-centric and diagnostic benchmarks have further high-lighted the difficulty of tiny targets under occlusion, weak salience, and strong reliance on local context [ 23 , 25 , 41 ]. However, these efforts still leave a practical gap. They do not directly ask whether 

Table 1: Comparison with related benchmarks. From left to right, the columns denote Benchmark ( Bench. ), Spatial Reasoning ( Spatial ), Continuous Scene Observation ( Obs. ), Everyday Indoor Object Context ( Indoor ), and Small Object Localization ( Local. ). Bench. Spatial Obs. Indoor Local. 

Open3D-VQA [40] ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗

EmbSpatial-Bench [9] ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗

V-STaR [5] ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗

STI-Bench [16] ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗

Video-MSR [42] ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗

VSI-Bench [35] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗

PinpointQA ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

a model can localize a target object in video and express its posi-tion with sufficient spatial precision. More importantly, they do not explicitly test the layered breakdown from target perception to structured spatial output. To fill this gap, we introduce PinpointQA, the first dedicated dataset and benchmark for small object-centric spatial understand-ing in indoor videos. Built from ScanNet++ [ 37 ] and ScanNet200 [ 24 ], where the latter extends the original ScanNet v2 [ 6] scene data and splits with a finer-grained label space, PinpointQA contains 1,024 scenes and 10,094 QA pairs, and supports both systematic evaluation and task-oriented fine-tuning. As shown in Figure 1, PinpointQA is organized around four tasks, Target Presence Verifi-cation (TPV), Nearest Reference Identification (NRI), Fine-Grained Spatial Description (FSD), and Structured Spatial Prediction (SSP). Representative examples, dataset statistics, and baseline results together provide an overall view of the dataset and benchmark. Our main contributions are as follows: 

• We present the first dedicated dataset and benchmark for small object-centric spatial understanding in indoor videos. 

• We formulate four benchmark tasks, TPV, NRI, FSD, and SSP, which together define a progressive capability chain from target recognition to structured spatial prediction. 

• We build the benchmark from ScanNet++ and ScanNet200, and through two fine-tuned models, we further show that the bench-mark serves not only as a diagnostic testbed, but also as a useful training resource. 

2 Related Work 2.1 Spatial Understanding Benchmarks 

Recent benchmarks have explored spatial understanding in videos and embodied 3D scenes from multiple perspectives. VSI-Bench [ 35 ]studies visual-spatial intelligence from sequential observations. V-STaR [ 5] and STI-Bench [ 16 ] focus on spatio-temporal reasoning and precise spatial-temporal understanding. Video-MSR [ 42 ] fur-ther emphasizes multi-hop spatial reasoning in dynamic videos. Open3D-VQA [ 40 ] and EmbSpatial-Bench [ 9 ] also highlight the growing importance of spatial relation reasoning and embodied spa-tial understanding for MLLMs. However, these benchmarks mainly focus on general spatial reasoning or broader scene understanding, PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

rather than a progressive task chain centered on small object lo-calization. To further illustrate this difference, Table 1 compares representative benchmarks from four aspects: spatial reasoning, continuous scene observation, indoor object context, and small ob-ject localization. As the table shows, existing work usually covers only part of these abilities and does not consider them in a unified way. To fill in this gap, we introduce PinpointQA, a benchmark for small object-centric spatial understanding, with more complete coverage of these aspects. 

2.2 Small Object Perception and Understanding Benchmarks 

Another related line focuses on small objects and the challenges they pose. EgoObjects [ 41 ] studies fine-grained small object under-standing in egocentric videos, while PerceptionTest [ 23 ] includes diagnostic tasks such as small object permanence, occlusion, and containment. These works move beyond generic video understand-ing and explicitly probe the difficulty of small targets. However, they mainly emphasize fine-grained object understanding or di-agnostic video reasoning, rather than small object-centric spatial understanding in video. In particular, they do not test whether a model can localize a target object and express its position with sufficient precision for downstream applications. 

3 PinpointQA Dataset 

To systematically evaluate small object-centric spatial understand-ing in videos, we introduce PinpointQA, a dataset designed to assess whether MLLMs can not only detect a target object, but also localize it through an intermediate spatial representation and express the result in forms useful for both humans and downstream systems. Figure 1 presents the overall structure of PinpointQA and its four tasks. We next describe its task formulation, construction pipeline, and dataset statistics. 

3.1 Task Formulation 

Small object-centric spatial understanding is not a single-step ability. A model must first determine whether the target object is present, then anchor it with nearby reference objects, further describe its location in a precise and human-readable way, and finally orga-nize the same grounded spatial information into a structured form for downstream use. To capture this progression, we define four tasks in PinpointQA: Target Presence Verification (TPV) , Nearest Ref-erence Identification (NRI) , Fine-Grained Spatial Description (FSD) ,and Structured Spatial Prediction (SSP) . Together, these tasks form a progressive capability chain from target presence verification to reference-based grounding, then to natural-language spatial de-scription, and ultimately to structured spatial output. 

Target Presence Verification (TPV). TPV isolates the entry-level requirement of small object-centric spatial understanding: determining whether a target object appears in the video at all. Unlike later tasks that require localization or spatial expression, TPV focuses only on presence verification under realistic indoor conditions, where small objects are often difficult to notice because of clutter, occlusion, and viewpoint changes. The task therefore asks the model to judge whether the target is present in the observed scene, establishing the basis on which all later localization-oriented reasoning depends. 

Nearest Reference Identification (NRI). NRI examines whe-ther the model can move beyond target presence and begin to ground the target in its local spatial context. Rather than simply rec-ognizing nearby objects, the key challenge is to determine which ref-erence object provides the nearest cue for localization. Concretely, the model is asked to identify the reference object closest to the target, excluding the supporting surface. Successful performance on this task requires the model to capture local spatial proximity around the target, making NRI the first step from target presence to local spatial grounding. 

Fine-Grained Spatial Description (FSD). FSD examines whe-ther the model can express the target location as a natural-language spatial description based on local spatial cues. Unlike TPV and NRI, which remain closed-form tasks, FSD requires the model to organize multiple pieces of spatial information into coherent free-form text. A correct answer should bring together the supporting surface, nearby reference objects, relative directions, and distances, so that the target location can be conveyed clearly and precisely to a human reader [ 15 ]. This task therefore evaluates not only whether the model identifies the relevant local spatial cues, but also whether it can express them as a fine-grained spatial description. 

Structured Spatial Prediction (SSP). SSP examines whether the model can further organize the target location into a structured spatial output. Unlike FSD, which expresses spatial information in free-form natural language, SSP requires the model to preserve the same localization-relevant spatial information in a more stan-dardized format. The expected output includes the key fields that directly support localization, such as the supporting surface, nearby reference objects, and their corresponding distances. As the final task in the chain, SSP tests whether the model can not only capture local spatial information, but also present it in a form that can be more easily parsed and used by downstream systems. 

3.2 Dataset Construction 

As illustrated in Figure 2, the construction of PinpointQA involves four stages: data collection, scene curation, task-specific QA genera-tion, and quality control. Rather than generating questions directly from raw annotations, We first construct an intermediate spatial representation from indoor 3D scenes and then instantiate it into the four tasks defined in Section 3.1. Additional details are provided in Appendix A. 

Data Collection. PinpointQA is built on ScanNet++ [ 37 ] and ScanNet200 [ 24 ], two large-scale indoor 3D scene datasets that pro-vide the geometric and semantic information required for dataset construction. They include aligned 3D meshes, instance-level an-notations, and segmentation masks, enabling target object identifi-cation, nearby reference collection, and object-level spatial relation computation. These properties support the construction of an inter-mediate spatial representation, which is instantiated into the four dataset tasks. Their multi-view indoor observations further align with our target scenario, where a user progressively searches for and localizes a small object from changing viewpoints. 

Scene Curation. In the scene curation stage, we use a pre-selected small object vocabulary from the original category labels Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng Phone selected as  a target 

Small  Object Selection    

> Small objects are selected
> according to the predefined
> vocabulary list .
> Table
> Cup Phone
> Screen

Phone 

> Note:
> target
> object

ScanNet++  ScanNet 200 

> Example Scene Visualization

Small Object 

Vocabulary 

Key 

Phone 

Watch 

…. 

> Glasses
> USB drive
> Earbud case
> ….

Legend 

Nearby objects are 

selected to form a  small 

object -centric  local 

neighborhood. 

> center
> Note:
> Retained nearby
> objects
> Filtered -out
> objects

Nearby Object 

Filtering 

> Nearby objects identified

Relative directions 

and distances are 

used to define local 

spatial relations.   

> Note:
> Near , 4 cm
> Next to,
> 1 cm
> Near ,3 cm

support ing 

surface 

Small object -centric 

local spatial relations 

:Filtered neighborhood radius :Target object 

:Retained nearby objects  :Filtered -out objects 

Target Definition   

> Instance Segmentation
> Annotations
> Aligned 3D Mesh es
> TXT TXT
> Question templates and answer logic are derived
> from target objects, support ing surfaces,
> and local spatial relations.

QA  Genera tion 

> Only QA templates and answer logic are manually
> refined; grounded components remain unchanged.

Quality Control 

Task -specific QA Generation 

Spatial Relation 

Computation      

> (MCQ )
> Select valid reference candidates
> Exclude the support ing
> surface
> GT: nearest valid reference
> object excluding the
> support ing surface
> (Yes/No)
> Select a target object
> Generate positive and
> negative queries
> Ground Truth :
> present or absent
> (JSON)
> Reuse the same grounded
> spatial context
> Keep target, support ing surface,
> and local spatial relations
> GT: structured JSON
> output for target
> spatial grounding
> Add 1–2nearby references
> with distances
> GT: grounded natural -
> language description
> of the target location
> (Natural Language)

Small Object 

Vocabulary 

Data  Collection  

> center
> Use support ing surface
> as the anchor
> Fine -Grained Spatial
> Description
> Structured Spatial
> Prediction
> Nearest Reference
> Identification
> Target Presence
> Verification

Scene Curation 

Grounded QA Construction 

> Aligned 3D Mesh es
> Instance Segmentation
> Annotations
> Example Scene Visualization

Figure 2: Dataset construction pipeline. Starting from ScanNet++ and ScanNet200, we define small object vocabularies, construct intermediate spatial representations through scene curation, and instantiate them into TPV, NRI, FSD, and SSP. Quality control is applied only to QA templates and answer logic. 

for everyday object-search scenarios [ 24 , 37 ] to identify candidate targets in each scene, while retaining the remaining objects as po-tential references. We then combine segmentation results with the aligned mesh to construct object-level geometric representations and organize a local neighborhood around each target. Nearby ob-jects within 1.0 m are kept by default, and fine-grained 3D spatial relations, including distance and vertical relations, are computed between the target and its neighbors. The resulting intermediate spatial representation serves as the basis for subsequent QA gener-ation. 

Task-specific QA Generation. Based on the intermediate rep-resentation, we generate QA pairs for four tasks. For TPV, we con-struct presence questions with both positive and negative samples, where negatives are drawn from small object categories absent in the scene. For NRI, we build multiple-choice questions over local reference objects, asking the model to identify the closest one to the target (excluding the supporting surface). For FSD, we generate free-form answers that describe the target location in a fine-grained manner using the supporting surface, nearby refer-ences, and centimeter-level distances. For SSP, we encode the same spatial information into a parsable JSON schema with key fields such as the target, supporting surface, and references. In this way, a single grounded small object-centric context is transformed into four question types of increasing difficulty, all derived from the spatial relations constructed during scene curation. 

Quality Control. To ensure accuracy and consistency, we adopt a quality control process combining automatic filtering and man-ual review. During scene curation, we remove invalid labels and background/structural objects, retaining only small object instances that satisfy the target vocabulary constraint along with their lo-cal neighborhoods. In QA generation, we construct questions only for target instances with unique labels within a scene and enforce 26.47%  

> 23.10%

25.08%  25.34% 

TPV  NRI  FSD  SSP 

(b) 

(c)  (d) 

:

:

:

TPV 

NRI 

FSD 

Legend 

SSP 

ScanNet++ 

> ScanNet200

751 

643 

645 

670 

1921 

1689 

1887 

1888 

ScanNet++ 

> ScanNet200

751 

643 

645 

670 

1921 

1689 

1887 

1888 

:

ScanNet++ 

> ScanNet200

751 

643 

645 

670 

1921 

1689 

1887 

1888 

:

:

:

:

TPV 

NRI 

FSD 

Legend 

SSP 

ScanNet++ 

> ScanNet200

751 

643 

645 

670 

1921 

1689 

1887 

1888 

:

(a) (a)        

> 3.91%
> 19.04% 15.82% 13.18% 15.72%
> 9.18% 8.50% 6.15% 3.22% 5.27%

26.8% 

73.2% 

0% 

5% 

10% 

15% 

20% 

25% 

30% 

Figure 3: Dataset statistics: (a) task distribution, (b) data-source composition and per-task counts, (c) target small ob-ject categories shown as a word cloud, and (d) video duration distribution. 

task-specific validity constraints: multiple-choice questions contain four distinct options, free-form answers are human-readable, and structured outputs include parsable key fields. Samples or scenes that fail these checks are excluded. In addition, we perform iterative manual spot-checking to refine QA generation logic and templates based on identified issues, while keeping the underlying intermedi-ate spatial representation unchanged. This process improves the accuracy, validity, and stability of the dataset. PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

Table 2: Main results on PinpointQA across the four tasks. For each task, Micro and Macro report the mean over all its QA pairs and the mean of per-scene scores, respectively. Avg is the arithmetic mean across the four tasks. Bold denotes the best performance in each column. Model TPV NRI FSD SSP Avg 

Micro Macro Micro Macro Micro Macro Micro Macro Micro Macro 

Proprietary Models 

GPT-5.4 [26] 0.65 0.69 0.39 0.42 0.31 0.32 0.15 0.16 0.38 0.40 Kimi K2.5 [28] 0.80 0.84 0.42 0.44 0.32 0.33 0.15 0.15 0.42 0.44 

Open-source Models 

LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-8B [1] 0.76 0.79 0.30 0.30 0.26 0.27 0.07 0.06 0.35 0.36 Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [2] 0.78 0.80 0.37 0.37 0.28 0.29 0.12 0.12 0.39 0.40 InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct [31] 0.65 0.70 0.36 0.38 0.25 0.26 0.09 0.10 0.34 0.36 Spatial-MLLM-v1.1-Instruct-820K [34] 0.52 0.51 0.30 0.30 0.21 0.20 0.00 0.00 0.26 0.25 SenseNova-SI-1.3-InternVL3-8B [4] 0.64 0.66 0.36 0.40 0.15 0.16 0.12 0.13 0.32 0.34 Cambrian-S-7B [36] 0.73 0.78 0.33 0.35 0.24 0.25 0.05 0.06 0.34 0.36 

Fine-tuned Models 

Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-SFT 0.83 0.84 0.44 0.45 0.36 0.37 0.29 0.29 0.48 0.49 

InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct-SFT 0.82 0.82 0.41 0.39 0.34 0.36 0.23 0.24 0.45 0.45 

3.3 Dataset Statistics 

Figure 3 summarizes the dataset statistics from four aspects: task composition, data-source composition, target categories, and video duration. PinpointQA is broadly balanced across TPV, NRI, FSD, and SSP (26.47%, 23.10%, 25.08%, and 25.34%, respectively), which helps prevent the dataset from being dominated by a single task type. It also combines samples from both ScanNet++ and ScanNet200, with 73.2% from the former and 26.8% from the latter, providing a primary data source together with complementary scene coverage. The target vocabulary spans a diverse set of small objects, rather than concentrating on only a few categories. Video durations are similarly broad: while many samples fall within 0-150s, a mean-ingful portion comes from longer videos as well. Overall, these statistics show that PinpointQA is not biased toward one task, a narrow set of target objects, or only short video clips, making it a more balanced dataset for small object-centric spatial understand-ing in indoor videos. 

4 Experiments 4.1 Experimental Setup 

Evaluated Models. We evaluate three groups of MLLMs on the proposed benchmark. The proprietary models are GPT-5.4 [ 26 ] and Kimi K2.5 [ 28 ]. The open-source models we consider include LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-8B [ 1 ], Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [ 2], and InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct [ 31 ]. We also evaluate Spatial-MLLM-v1.1-Instruct-820K [ 34 ], SenseNova-SI-1.3-InternVL3-8B [ 4 ], and Cambrian-S-7B [ 36 ]. To further examine the utility of the benchmark as a training resource, we additionally conduct LoRA fine-tuning on two representative open-source backbones, yielding Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-SFT and InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct-SFT [13]. 

Benchmark Split. The benchmark is partitioned at the scene level into training, validation, and evaluation splits, approximately following a 6:2:2 ratio and yielding 6,121, 1,954, and 2,019 samples, respectively. During the split, we jointly preserve the source pro-portions of the two datasets and the distribution of the four task types. Scene-level partitioning is used throughout to avoid data leakage across splits. All four tasks are constructed and evaluated under the same split. 

Inference and Fine-tuning. For inference, we use 64 uniformly sampled frames from each input video. Across models, we keep the task instructions and question templates largely consistent, with only minor adjustments to match different model interfaces. All four tasks are evaluated in an instruction-guided setting, and decoding is performed with greedy decoding. For fine-tuning, we train on the training split, select the best checkpoint on the validation split, and run all LoRA tuning for 2 epochs. The purpose of this setting is not to maximize task-specific engineering gains, but to verify whether the proposed benchmark can provide effective supervision for improving small object-centric spatial understanding. 

4.2 Evaluation Metrics 

Because the four tasks have different output formats, we adopt task-specific metrics. 

Closed-form Tasks. For TPV and NRI, the answer space is closed and unique, so we use exact-match accuracy. TPV extracts a 

Yes/No label from the model output, while NRI extracts the predicted option letter and compares it with the ground truth. 

Fine-Grained Spatial Description. For FSD, BLEU, ROUGE, and string-level exact match are not suitable [ 18 , 22 ], because dif-ferent natural-language answers may be lexically different but still equivalent in supporting surface, reference objects, spatial rela-tions, and distances. We therefore adopt an LLM-as-a-judge pro-tocol using GPT-5.4 [ 20 , 39 ]. The judge scores five dimensions: main location and supporting surface (0–3), key reference objects (0–2), spatial relations (0–2), centimeter-level distance (0–2), and clarity (0–1), giving a total of 10 points, which is then normalized to [0, 1]. The scoring is intentionally conservative: weakening a Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng 

strong directional relation to vague proximity is penalized, and numeric distances are judged with range-aware tolerances. 

Structured Spatial Prediction. For SSP, relying on strict JSON exact-match evaluation is overly restrictive, as it is sensitive to superficial variations such as field ordering, lexical paraphrases, and minor numerical discrepancies, which may result in unjustified zero scores. We first parse and normalize the predicted JSON, then align predicted references to the ground-truth slots, and finally compute a weighted soft score over supporting surface, object identity, relation, and distance. The supporting surface contributes 0.4, while the other three terms each contribute 0.2. Limited soft matching is allowed for semantically close relation pairs, such as next_to vs. near , under 

vs. below , and on vs. attached_to ; distance scoring follows the same range-aware tolerance policy as FSD. 

Aggregation. We report Micro and Macro scores for each task separately. Micro is the average over all QA pairs of the task; Macro is the average of per-scene means. Avg is the arithmetic mean across the four tasks. All scores are normalized to [0, 1] for fair comparison. For metric settings, please refer to Appendix B. 

4.3 Main Results on the Proposed Benchmark 

Table 2 summarizes the performance of all evaluated models on the proposed benchmark across the four tasks. Figure 1 also provides a radar chart view of representative models across the four tasks. Based on these results, we highlight several key findings from the perspectives of overall competitiveness, progressive capability breakdown, stage-specific failure profiles, and training utility. 

Overall competitiveness. Table 2 reports the main results across the four tasks. Overall, Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-SFT consis-tently achieves the best performance, reaching 0.48 in Avg-Micro and 0.49 in Avg-Macro, followed by InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct-SFT with 0.45 in both metrics. Among proprietary models, Kimi K2.5 outperforms GPT-5.4, achieving 0.42 in Avg-Micro and 0.44 in Avg-Macro, compared with 0.38 and 0.40 for GPT-5.4. Among non-fine-tuned open-source models, Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct performs best, with 0.39 in Avg-Micro and 0.40 in Avg-Macro. Notably, it already exceeds GPT-5.4 in Avg-Micro and matches it in Avg-Macro. More broadly, the overall ranking under Micro and Macro is highly consistent, suggesting that the observed differences are not driven only by a few frequent samples. 

Progressive capability breakdown. A clear result is the mono-tonic decline from TPV to SSP . This pattern appears across almost all models. For example, Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-SFT drops from 0.83 in Micro and 0.84 in Macro on TPV to 0.29 in both metrics on SSP. Kimi K2.5 drops from 0.80 in Micro and 0.84 in Macro to 0.15 in both metrics, and Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct drops from 0.78 in Micro and 0.80 in Macro to 0.12 in both metrics. This shows that current MLLMs do not fail at one isolated step. Instead, perfor-mance degrades steadily as the task moves from target perception to reference grounding, fine-grained spatial description, and finally structured spatial output. The result directly supports the meaning of our four-stage task design. 

Stage-specific failure profiles. Our proposed benchmark pro-vides an inherent diagnostic capability, revealing distinct failure points across models. These differences indicate that the benchmark can reveal where the failure first occurs, rather than providing only a single over-all score. LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-8B achieves 0.76/0.79 (Micro/-Macro) on TPV and 0.26/0.27 on FSD, but drops to 0.07/0.06 on SSP. 

Cambrian-S-7B shows a similar trend, with 0.73/0.78 on TPV but only 0.05/0.06 on SSP. In contrast, SenseNova-SI-1.3-InternVL3-8B attains 0.36/0.40 on NRI yet only 0.15/0.16 on FSD, indicating a different bottleneck between reference grounding and natural-language localization. These patterns demonstrate that our bench-mark identifies where failures occur, rather than providing a single aggregated score. Representative qualitative examples are provided in Appendix C. 

Dataset as a training resource. We conduct fine-tuning experi-ments and observe consistent improvements across models. Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct improves from 0.39/0.40 (Avg-Micro/Macro) to 0.48/0.49, while InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct improves from 0.34/0.36 to 0.45/0.45. The largest gains are observed on SSP : Qwen improves from 0.12/0.12 to 0.29/0.29, and InternVL from 0.09/0.10 to 0.23/0.24. Despite these improvements, SSP performance remains substan-tially lower than TPV, NRI, and FSD, indicating that executable spatial grounding is still the primary bottleneck for current models. 0     

> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Accuracy (%)
> Unguided Model-Assisted GT-Assisted
> (a)
> 62.1%
> 79.4% 87.8%
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> Time (s)
> Unguided Model-Assisted GT-Assisted
> (b)
> 29s
> 15s
> 9s

Figure 4: Human Assistance Evaluation under three settings: 

Unguided , Model-Assisted , and GT-Assisted . (a) Localization accuracy. (b) Average completion time per question. 

4.4 Human Assistance Evaluation 

To examine whether Fine-Grained Spatial Description (FSD) can assist small object localization, we conduct a Human Assistance Evaluation using a web-based click interface under three settings: Unguided, Model-Assisted with natural-language answers gener-ated by the fine-tuned Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-SFT, and GT-Assisted. The evaluation uses 60 FSD samples with 20 samples per setting, and we report mean results across five volunteers. Detailed settings and interface examples are provided in Appendix D. Participants browse video frames, select the target frame, and click the object location; completion time is measured from start to submission. Accuracy is computed against manually annotated target points: the score is 0 for incorrect frames, otherwise a soft score is based on normalized click distance. As shown in Figure 4, FSD answers substantially improve human small object search performance. Compared with Unguided, Model-Assisted increases accuracy from 62.1% to 79.4% and reduces average completion time from 29 s to 15 s. GT-Assisted further reaches 87.8% accuracy with an average time of 9 s. These results confirm that FSD offers practical support for small object localization, though a noticeable gap remains versus ground truth. PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce PinpointQA, a dataset and benchmark for small object-centric spatial understanding in indoor videos. Built on ScanNet++ and ScanNet200, PinpointQA contains 1,024 scenes and 10,094 QA pairs, and is organized into four tasks, TPV, NRI, FSD, and SSP, to evaluate how well models identify, localize, and describe small objects in cluttered indoor environments. We conduct systematic experiments on 8 representative MLLMs, and the results show that precise localization and well-formed spatial expression for small objects remain challenging for current models. As an additional study, LoRA fine-tuning on two open-source backbones further shows that PinpointQA can serve as an effective training dataset for this task. Overall, PinpointQA fills a gap in existing video spatial understanding benchmarks for small object scenarios and provides a more focused basis for future research. Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng 

References 

[1] Xiang An, Yin Xie, Kaicheng Yang, Wenkang Zhang, Xiuwei Zhao, Zheng Cheng, Yirui Wang, Songcen Xu, Changrui Chen, Didi Zhu, et al . 2025. Llava-onevision-1.5: Fully open framework for democratized multimodal training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23661 (2025). [2] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, et al . 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 (2025). [3] Tara Boroushaki, Isaac Perper, Mergen Nachin, Alberto Rodriguez, and Fadel Adib. 2021. Rfusion: Robotic grasping via rf-visual sensing and learning. In 

Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on embedded networked sensor systems .192–205. [4] Zhongang Cai, Ruisi Wang, Chenyang Gu, Fanyi Pu, Junxiang Xu, Yubo Wang, Wanqi Yin, Zhitao Yang, Chen Wei, Qingping Sun, et al . 2025. Scaling spatial intelligence with multimodal foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13719 

(2025). [5] Zixu Cheng, Jian Hu, Ziquan Liu, Chenyang Si, Wei Li, and Shaogang Gong. 2025. V-star: Benchmarking video-llms on video spatio-temporal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11495 (2025). [6] Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. 2017. Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 5828–5839. [7] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Evan-gelos Kazakos, Jian Ma, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, et al . 2022. Rescaling egocentric vision: Collection, pipeline and challenges for epic-kitchens-100. International Journal of Computer Vision 130, 1 (2022), 33–55. [8] Robert Desimone, John Duncan, et al . 1995. Neural mechanisms of selective visual attention. Annual review of neuroscience 18, 1 (1995), 193–222. [9] Mengfei Du, Binhao Wu, Zejun Li, Xuan-Jing Huang, and Zhongyu Wei. 2024. Embspatial-bench: Benchmarking spatial understanding for embodied tasks with large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) . 346–355. [10] Yisen Feng, Haoyu Zhang, Meng Liu, Weili Guan, and Liqiang Nie. 2025. Object-shot enhanced grounding network for egocentric video. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 24190–24200. [11] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al . 2022. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition .18995–19012. [12] Shuting He and Henghui Ding. 2024. Decoupling static and hierarchical motion perception for referring video segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 13332–13341. [13] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Liang Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al . 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. Iclr 1, 2 (2022), 3. [14] Haifeng Huang, Yilun Chen, Zehan Wang, Rongjie Huang, Runsen Xu, Tai Wang, Luping Liu, Xize Cheng, Yang Zhao, Jiangmiao Pang, et al . 2024. Chat-scene: Bridging 3d scene and large language models with object identifiers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 113991–114017. [15] Shunya Kato, Shuhei Kurita, Chenhui Chu, and Sadao Kurohashi. 2023. Ark-itscenerefer: Text-based localization of small objects in diverse real-world 3d indoor scenes. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 . 784–799. [16] Yun Li, Yiming Zhang, Tao Lin, XiangRui Liu, Wenxiao Cai, Zheng Liu, and Bo Zhao. 2025. Sti-bench: Are mllms ready for precise spatial-temporal world under-standing?. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 5622–5632. [17] Tianming Liang, Kun-Yu Lin, Chaolei Tan, Jianguo Zhang, Wei-Shi Zheng, and Jian-Fang Hu. 2025. Referdino: Referring video object segmentation with visual grounding foundations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 20009–20019. [18] Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out . 74–81. [19] Jingli Lin, Chenming Zhu, Runsen Xu, Xiaohan Mao, Xihui Liu, Tai Wang, and Jiangmiao Pang. 2025. OST-Bench: Evaluating the Capabilities of MLLMs in Online Spatio-temporal Scene Understanding. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .https://openreview.net/forum?id=vAkVKIOtcN [20] Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: NLG evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing . 2511–2522. [21] Karttikeya Mangalam, Raiymbek Akshulakov, and Jitendra Malik. 2023. Egoschema: A diagnostic benchmark for very long-form video language un-derstanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 46212– 46244. [22] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . 311–318. [23] Viorica Patraucean, Lucas Smaira, Ankush Gupta, Adria Recasens, Larisa Mar-keeva, Dylan Banarse, Skanda Koppula, Mateusz Malinowski, Yi Yang, Carl Doersch, et al . 2023. Perception test: A diagnostic benchmark for multimodal video models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 42748–42761. [24] David Rozenberszki, Or Litany, and Angela Dai. 2022. Language-grounded indoor 3d semantic segmentation in the wild. In European conference on computer vision .Springer, 125–141. [25] Yuhan Shen, Huiyu Wang, Xitong Yang, Matt Feiszli, Ehsan Elhamifar, Lorenzo Torresani, and Effrosyni Mavroudi. 2024. Learning to segment referred objects from narrated egocentric videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 14510–14520. [26] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al .2025. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 (2025). [27] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al . 2023. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 (2023). [28] Kimi Team, Tongtong Bai, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, SH Cai, Yuan Cao, Y Charles, HS Che, Cheng Chen, Guanduo Chen, et al . 2026. Kimi K2. 5: Visual Agentic Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02276 (2026). [29] Antonio Torralba, Aude Oliva, Monica S Castelhano, and John M Henderson. 2006. Contextual guidance of eye movements and attention in real-world scenes: the role of global features in object search. Psychological review 113, 4 (2006), 766. [30] Timothy J Vickery, Li-Wei King, and Yuhong Jiang. 2005. Setting up the target template in visual search. Journal of vision 5, 1 (2005), 8–8. [31] Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, et al . 2025. Internvl3. 5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in versatility, reasoning, and efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265 (2025). [32] Wenqi Wang, Reuben Tan, Pengyue Zhu, Jianwei Yang, Zhengyuan Yang, Lijuan Wang, Andrey Kolobov, Jianfeng Gao, and Boqing Gong. 2025. Site: towards spa-tial intelligence thorough evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 9058–9069. [33] Jeremy M Wolfe. 2021. Guided Search 6.0: An updated model of visual search. 

Psychonomic bulletin & review 28, 4 (2021), 1060–1092. [34] Diankun Wu, Fangfu Liu, Yi-Hsin Hung, and Yueqi Duan. 2025. Spatial-mllm: Boosting mllm capabilities in visual-based spatial intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23747 (2025). [35] Jihan Yang, Shusheng Yang, Anjali W Gupta, Rilyn Han, Li Fei-Fei, and Saining Xie. 2025. Thinking in space: How multimodal large language models see, remember, and recall spaces. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 10632–10643. [36] Shusheng Yang, Jihan Yang, Pinzhi Huang, Ellis Brown, Zihao Yang, Yue Yu, Shengbang Tong, Zihan Zheng, Yifan Xu, Muhan Wang, et al . 2025. Cambrian-s: Towards spatial supersensing in video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04670 (2025). [37] Chandan Yeshwanth, Yueh-Cheng Liu, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. 2023. Scannet++: A high-fidelity dataset of 3d indoor scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 12–22. [38] Yuqian Yuan, Hang Zhang, Wentong Li, Zesen Cheng, Boqiang Zhang, Long Li, Xin Li, Deli Zhao, Wenqiao Zhang, Yueting Zhuang, et al . 2025. Videorefer suite: Advancing spatial-temporal object understanding with video llm. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 18970–18980. [39] Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 (2019). [40] Weichen Zhang, Zile Zhou, Xin Zeng, Liu Xuchen, Jianjie Fang, Chen Gao, Jinqiang Cui, Yong Li, Xinlei Chen, and Xiao-Ping Zhang. 2025. Open3d-vqa: A benchmark for embodied spatial concept reasoning with multimodal large language model in open space. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia . 12784–12791. [41] Chenchen Zhu, Fanyi Xiao, Andrés Alvarado, Yasmine Babaei, Jiabo Hu, Hichem El-Mohri, Sean Culatana, Roshan Sumbaly, and Zhicheng Yan. 2023. Egoobjects: A large-scale egocentric dataset for fine-grained object understanding. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 20110–20120. [42] Rui Zhu, Xin Shen, Shuchen Wu, Chenxi Miao, Xin Yu, Yang Li, Weikang Li, Deguo Xia, and Jizhou Huang. 2026. Video-MSR: Benchmarking Multi-hop Spatial Reasoning Capabilities of MLLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09430 (2026). PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

Appendix 

Due to space constraints in the main paper, this appendix supplies supplementary details and analyses. We begin with additional infor-mation on dataset construction and a more in-depth description of the evaluation metrics. We then examine failure cases and provide further details on the Human Assistance Evaluation. The appen-dix concludes with a brief discussion of the benchmark’s scope, limitations, and intended use. 

A. Details of Dataset Construction 

1. Scene Curation 2. Reference Objects and Supporting Surface 3. QA Generation 4. Quality Control 

B. Details of Evaluation Metrics 

1. FSD Evaluation Setting 2. SSP Evaluation Setting 

C. Representative Qualitative Examples 

1. TPV Failure Case 2. NRI Failure Case 3. FSD Failure Case 4. SSP Failure Case 

D. Details of Human Assistance Evaluation 

1. Interface and Protocol 2. Scoring Scheme 

E. Discussion 

1. Intended Use 2. Limitations 

A Details of Dataset Construction A.1 Scene Curation 

Scene curation converts each indoor 3D scene into intermediate spa-tial representations that can be reused across all four tasks. Starting from a predefined small object vocabulary, we identify candidate targets and retain nearby objects as potential references. Instead of using the full scene directly for QA construction, we organize a local neighborhood around each target and preserve only the information most relevant to localization. Nearby objects within 1.0 m are kept by default, and fine-grained 3D spatial relations are com-puted between the target and its neighbors, including distance and vertical relations. The resulting intermediate spatial representation therefore captures both the nearby objects around the target and their target-centered geometric arrangement, providing a shared grounding basis for subsequent QA generation. 

A.2 Reference Objects and Supporting Surface 

Within each intermediate spatial representation, nearby objects play different roles. Reference objects provide local cues that help dis-ambiguate the target position, while the supporting surface serves as the main spatial anchor describing where the target finally rests. This distinction is important because the same grounded context is reused differently across tasks. In NRI, the supporting surface is excluded so that the question focuses on the nearest valid reference object beyond the most obvious anchor. In FSD, the supporting surface is typically used as the first anchor in the answer, after which one or two nearby reference objects provide additional lo-calization cues. In SSP, the same grounded information is retained in structured form by explicitly preserving the target, its support-ing surface, and a small number of nearby references. Supporting surfaces and reference objects are thus complementary rather than interchangeable. Small Object Vocabulary 

bag, backpack, book, bottle, bowl, candle, cup, dumbbell, hair dryer, hat, headphones, keyboard, laptop, mouse, purse, shoe, tissue box, water bottle, alarm clock, ball, stuffed animal, plate, clock, cd case, coffee kettle, paper towel roll, scale, soap dish, soap dispenser, telephone, toaster, tray, water pitcher, fire extinguisher, paper cutter, plunger, dustpan, broom, power strip, toilet paper, guitar, toaster oven, paper bag, key, phone, smartphone, mobile phone, earbuds, earphones, wireless headphones, headset, headphone case, remote control, tv remote, remote controller, remote, tv controller, game controller, charger, power adapter, laptop charger, phone charger, power bank, wireless charger, power plug, adapter, dongle, usb hub, extension cord, power cord, cable, wallet, handbag, tote bag, glasses, eyeglasses, glasses case, mouse pad, mousepad, pen, pencil, marker, highlighter, notebook, notepad, mug, spray bottle, lotion bottle, deodorant bottle, toothbrush, razor, comb, hairbrush, scissors, stapler, tape dispenser, glue bottle, calculator, lanyard, pen holder, pencil holder, pencil case, post it note, sticky note, phone stand, tissue, eraser, soap, power extension 

A.3 QA Generation 

Based on the intermediate spatial representation, we instantiate four task formats of increasing difficulty. For TPV, we generate both positive and negative presence queries; negative queries are drawn from small-object categories absent from the scene, so both labels remain grounded in scene-level object presence. For NRI, we construct multiple-choice questions over valid reference objects and ask the model to identify the nearest one while excluding the supporting surface. For FSD, we transform the same grounded spatial facts into concise but precise free-form answers, usually starting from the supporting surface and then incorporating one or two nearby reference objects with centimeter-level distances. For SSP, we preserve the same localization-relevant information in a parsable JSON format containing the target, the supporting surface, and a small set of nearby references. These four tasks are therefore Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng 

not built from separate annotation pipelines, but from different instantiations of the same intermediate spatial representation. 

A.4 Quality Control 

To improve dataset reliability, we combine automatic filtering with iterative manual review. On the automatic side, we remove invalid labels and background or structural objects during scene curation, and we generate QA pairs only for target instances satisfying task-specific validity constraints. In particular, multiple-choice questions must contain four distinct options, free-form answers must remain human-readable, and structured outputs must be directly parsable. Samples or scenes that fail these checks are excluded rather than re-tained as noisy supervision. On the manual side, each review round spot-checks roughly 100 QA pairs spanning about 10–15 scenes. We examine whether Task 2 mistakenly includes the supporting surface as a candidate, whether Task 3 correctly preserves the supporting surface and nearby references, whether distances and relations remain consistent with the underlying geometry, whether the templates are natural and well formed, and whether the result-ing localization is plausible from a human observation perspective. Issues found in these checks are then used to revise QA generation logic, question templates, and filtering rules, while keeping the underlying intermediate spatial representation unchanged. 

B Details of Evaluation Metrics B.1 FSD Evaluation Setting 

Here we provide additional implementation details for the GPT-5.4-based judge used in FSD evaluation. To improve scoring stability, the judge is required to return a structured JSON object rather than free-form commentary. The output includes the total score, the five dimension scores defined in the main paper, and explicit error tags such as wrong main location, wrong supporting surface, missing key reference, wrong spatial relation, missing or wrong numeric distance, unclear expression, and hallucinated reference. In our implementation, the returned total score is also checked against the sum of the five dimension scores and automatically cor-rected if the two disagree, which avoids accidental inconsistencies in judge outputs. This design makes the metric not only scalar, but also diagnostic. For completeness, we provide the scoring rubric in Figure 5, while the full judge prompt is included in the project repository. 

B.2 SSP Evaluation Setting 

Here we provide additional implementation details for the SSP metric described in the main paper. Before scoring, the evaluator first attempts to recover a valid JSON object from the model output, even when the prediction is wrapped in extra text or code fences. It then applies conservative normalization to object labels, supporting-surface labels, and relation tokens, so that superficial formatting differences do not dominate the score. The recovered output is also checked for basic structural validity, including the presence of a supporting surface field and a references list with object, relation, and distance entries. After normalization, predicted references are aligned to the ground-truth slots before computing the weighted soft score de-fined in the main text. Exact relation matches receive full credit, while the limited set of semantically close relation pairs listed in the main paper receive partial credit. Distance is scored using the same range-aware tolerance policy as FSD. In this way, the met-ric remains tolerant to formatting noise while preserving strict evaluation of localization-relevant structured content. 

C Representative Qualitative Examples 

This section presents representative qualitative examples to analyze the typical failure modes of different models in small-object spa-tial understanding. We examine three scenes with different small-object targets: mouse in scene 062e5a23a6 , mobile phone in scene 

0b031f3119 , and headphone case in scene 281ba69af1 . As shown in Figures 6, 7, and 8, the errors do not arise in a single uniform way. Instead, different models break down at different stages, rang-ing from missing the target itself, to selecting the wrong nearby anchor, to losing the correct target-centered local spatial context in free-form description and structured prediction. In all figures, green marks indicate GT-consistent content, while red marks indicate content that deviates from the GT. 

C.1 TPV Failure Case 

We first examine failures at the Target Presence Verification (TPV) stage. Figure 6 shows a representative TPV error for mouse in scene 

062e5a23a6 . Although the target is present in the scene, Cambrian-S-7B directly predicts No . This case reflects one of the earliest failures in the progressive capability chain: even when the overall desktop scene is clearly visible, the model still cannot reliably de-termine whether the queried target is present. More importantly, it suggests that, in cluttered indoor videos, perceiving the overall scene does not necessarily translate into accurate judgments about the presence of a small target. If the model cannot complete target presence verification at the outset, then later stages, including Near-est Reference Identification, Fine-Grained Spatial Description, and Structured Spatial Prediction, also lose their reliable foundation. This also indicates that current general-purpose MLLMs remain weak at preserving small-object-related cues, especially when the target itself is not salient and is surrounded by more visually promi-nent distractors. 

C.2 NRI Failure Case 

At the Nearest Reference Identification (NRI) stage, the same mouse 

example also shows a typical error. As shown in Figure 6, although GPT-5.4 is able to determine that the target appears in the scene, it still makes an error when selecting the nearest reference object: instead of choosing the GT answer office chair , it predicts laptop bag . Compared with TPV, NRI requires the model not only to recog-nize the queried target, but also to determine which nearby object provides the nearest and most informative cue for localization. This example shows that, even after recognizing the target, the model may still fail to identify the most important nearby refer-ence around it. Instead, it is more easily distracted by objects that are visually more prominent in the scene, and therefore selects an object that looks plausible but is not actually the nearest one in spatial terms. As a result, the transition from Target Presence Verifi-cation to Nearest Reference Identification remains a clear challenge for current models. More broadly, this also suggests that general PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

visual-language models often rely on salient objects when forming an answer, rather than consistently reasoning around the target’s nearby local spatial context. 

C.3 FSD Failure Case 

The Fine-Grained Spatial Description (FSD) examples in Figures 6, 7, and 8 show a fairly consistent pattern: the generated descriptions are often fluent and seem reasonable at the overall scene level, but the local anchors used for localization have already drifted away from the GT. In Figure 6, for example, LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-8B describes the mouse using laptop and keyboard , whereas the truly important reference objects in the GT are office chair and glasses case . In Figure 7, Kimi K2.5 rewrites the mobile phone into a more generic desk-level description centered on monitor and keyboard ,rather than preserving the GT description built around tripod , table ,and keyboard ; InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct retains part of the tabletop context, but still shifts the local configuration to keyboard and 

mouse , with distances that no longer match the GT. In Figure 8, GPT-5.4 preserves the target category and the broad tabletop context, but its local references drift to cloth , tissue packet , and plant , while LLaVA-OneVision-1.5-8B goes further and places the target entirely on the floor . Taken together, these examples show that the difficulty of FSD does not lie in generating natural language itself, but in preserving the correct target-centered local spatial context while turning perception into text. In other words, a description that sounds natural does not necessarily remain spatially accurate. More broadly, this also suggests that once the model enters free-form generation, its output is easily shaped by common expressions and scene priors; if the local spatial evidence around the target is not stably retained, the model is more likely to fall back on descriptions that are more familiar and more fluent, but already deviate from the GT in spatial terms. 

C.4 SSP Failure Case 

A similar pattern can also be observed at the Structured Spatial Prediction (SSP) stage, except that the errors now appear in struc-tured outputs. Figure 6 shows that SenseNova-SI-1.3-InternVL3-8B generates a syntactically valid JSON output for mouse , but the support surface, reference objects, and spatial relations no longer match the GT. Figures 7 and 8 further illustrate the same issue. For mobile phone , Kimi K2.5 produces a well-formed JSON object, but replaces the original GT support surface and reference struc-ture with a desk-centered configuration involving keyboard and 

monitor ; InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct retains table as the support sur-face, but still shifts the nearby reference objects and their spatial relations to keyboard and mouse , thereby breaking the original target-centered spatial representation. For headphone case , GPT-5.4 outputs a valid JSON object and preserves the broad tabletop con-text, but its reference objects drift to tissue box and door ; SenseNova-SI-1.3-InternVL3-8B further rewrites the support surface as chair ,causing the local configuration around the target to deviate even further from the GT. Taken together, these examples show that SSP is not merely a test of whether a model can output a well-formed JSON object. More importantly, it examines whether the model can preserve the target-centered spatial evidence established in earlier stages within a structured representation. From the model outputs, a clear gap can be seen: structural correctness constrains the format of the output, but does not guarantee that the spatial representation itself remains correct. Once the earlier visual localization has al-ready drifted, the model may still produce a fully valid JSON object whose spatial content is nevertheless wrong. Overall, these three examples reflect an error pattern that be-comes increasingly apparent as the task progresses. Some models fail at relatively early stages, either by failing to determine whether the target is present or by failing to identify the nearest reference object correctly. Others are able to pass the earlier stages, but gradu-ally lose the correct local anchors for localization when generating free-form descriptions or structured outputs. This suggests that the central challenge highlighted by PinpointQA is not simply whether a model can mention the target object, but whether it can maintain an accurate and consistent target-centered spatial representation throughout the full prediction chain. 

D Details of Human Assistance Evaluation D.1 Interface and Protocol 

We implement the Human Assistance Evaluation using a web-based click interface. For each sample, the interface displays the question together with multiple video frames. Participants browse the frames, select the one most likely to contain the correct target location, and click the estimated target location. The visual interaction is identical across all settings, and only the accompanying text differs. In the Unguided setting, participants see only the question and the video frames. In the two guided settings, the textual hint is shown before the participant begins answering the question. In the Model-Assisted setting, participants additionally see the natural-language FSD answer generated by the fine-tuned Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-SFT model. In the GT-Assisted setting, this text is replaced by the ground-truth FSD answer. Figure 9 shows the interface under the assisted setting. For each sample, the participant starts the question, browses the frames, clicks the target location on the selected frame, and saves the response. Ground-truth target points are annotated beforehand using the same tool in annotation mode, which records the reference frame index and normalized click coordinates for each sample. 

D.2 Scoring Scheme 

Each submitted response consists of a selected frame index and normalized click coordinates (𝑥, 𝑦 ). The completion time for each question is measured from the moment the participant starts the question to the moment the response is saved. Accuracy is evalu-ated against the manually annotated target point. If the selected frame is incorrect, the score is set to 0. Otherwise, let 𝑑 denote the normalized Euclidean distance between the participant’s click and the annotated target point. The score is computed with a quadratic decay within a fixed radius 𝑟 = 0.12 :

𝑠 = max 0, 1 −

 𝑑 𝑟 

2 !

, 𝑟 = 0.12 .

The final accuracy is reported as the mean of per-question scores, and the completion time is reported as the mean of per-question elapsed times. Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng 

This metric requires both correct frame selection and accurate localization within the chosen frame. Compared with frame-only retrieval accuracy, it imposes a stricter criterion while still providing a graded measure rather than a binary decision. 

E Discussion E.1 Intended Use 

PinpointQA is intended as a focused benchmark for small object-centric spatial understanding in indoor videos. Rather than covering all aspects of video understanding, it is designed to probe a specific capability chain: from target presence, to reference-based ground-ing, to fine-grained spatial description, and finally to structured spatial output. This makes it particularly suitable for studying how multimodal systems localize small objects through nearby refer-ences and how well such grounded information can be expressed in both human-readable and machine-usable forms. In addition to benchmarking, the experimental results also suggest that Pin-pointQA can serve as a useful source of supervision for instruction tuning or supervised fine-tuning on grounded spatial QA tasks, es-pecially when the goal is to improve localization-oriented behavior rather than broad open-domain video understanding. 

E.2 Limitations 

At the same time, the scope of PinpointQA is intentionally restricted, and this boundary should be considered when interpreting results. The benchmark is limited to indoor scenes and to small object-centric localization and spatial expression, rather than full-scene understanding, open-world tracking, dense video captioning, or un-constrained embodied interaction. Moreover, the released QA pairs are derived from intermediate spatial representations and bench-mark construction logic, which improves grounding consistency and comparability across tasks, but can also make some answer styles more regular than unconstrained human language. This re-flects a deliberate trade-off in the benchmark design: PinpointQA prioritizes stable, localization-relevant supervision over maximum linguistic or environmental diversity. In addition, because the repos-itory does not redistribute original videos or raw scene assets, full reproduction still depends on separate access to the underlying source datasets. PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

Figure 5: Core scoring rubric of our prompt-based judge for Fine-Grained Spatial Description. The full prompt is available in the project repository. Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng Scene ：062e5a23a6 

Question: In the entire scene, did the  mouse 

appear? 

Ground Truth :Yes 

Question: Excluding the surface it is resting on, 

which of the following objects is nearest to the 

final location of the  mouse  in this scene? 

A. glasses case  B. monitor 

Ground Truth : C. office chair 

Question: Please describe in detail the final 

location of the  mouse  in the scene, including 

its distance and relation to nearby objects. 

C. office chair 

Ground Truth : The mouse  is  on the table. It 

is also to the side of and above the office 

chair, about 6 cm away. It is further near 

the glasses case, about 26 cm away. 

Question: Please output the final location of 

the  mouse  in structured JSON format. 

Ground Truth : {"target": "mouse", 

"support_surface": "table", "references": 

[{"object": "office chair", "relation": 

"side_above", "distance_cm": 5.8}, {"object": 

"glasses case", "relation": "near", 

"distance_cm": 25.6}]} 

# NRI (GPT -5.4) 

Question: Excluding the surface it is resting 

on, which of the following objects is nearest 

to the final location of the mouse in this 

scene? 

Output:  D. laptop bag 

# NRI (GPT -5.4) 

Question: Excluding the surface it is resting 

on, which of the following objects is nearest 

to the final location of the mouse in this 

scene? 

Output:  D. laptop bag 

# TPV( Cambrian -S-7B )

Question: In the entire scene, did the 

mouse appear? 

Output: No 

# TPV( Cambrian -S-7B )

Question: In the entire scene, did the 

mouse appear? 

Output: No 

D. laptop bag 

TPV TPV 

NRI NRI 

FSD FSD 

SSP SSP 

# FSD (LLaVA -OneVision -1.5 -8B) 

Question: Please describe in detail the final 

location of the mouse in the scene, including 

its distance and relation to nearby objects. 

Output:  The mouse is located on the desk, 

approximately 23 cm away from the edge of the 

desk.  It is positioned  near a black laptop, 

which is about 41 cm away from the mouse. The 

desk also has a white keyboard placed 

directly in front of the mouse, at a distance 

of about 15 cm. 

## SSP 

## (SenseNova -SI -1.3 -InternVL3 -8B) 

Output: \texttt{\{"target":" mouse ","support\ 

_surface": "chair" ,"references":[\ 

{"object": "chair" ,"relation": "on" \},\ 

{"object":" desk ","relation":" below "\}]\}} 

Question: Please output the final location 

of the mouse in structured JSON format. 

Figure 6: Example 1. Progressive failure across TPV, NRI, FSD, and SSP for target mouse in scene 062e5a23a6 . Different models break down at different stages, ranging from missing the target itself, to selecting an incorrect nearby anchor, to producing free-form and structured outputs that no longer preserve the correct target-centered local spatial context. PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos Scene ：0b031f3119 

Question: Please describe in detail the final location 

of the  mobile phone  in the scene, including its 

distance and relation to nearby objects. 

Ground Truth : The mobile phone  is  above the 

tripod. It is also to the side of and above the 

table, about 23 cm away. It is further to the side 

of and above the keyboard, about 27 cm away. 

Question: Please output the final location of 

the  mobile phone  in structured JSON format. 

FSD FSD 

SSP SSP 

# FSD    

> Output: The mobile phone rests on the white desk
> surface , positioned approximately 15 cm to the right
> of the black computer monitor and about 25 cm in front
> of the wall -mounted power outlets. The phone lies flat
> on the desk , separated from the keyboard by a small
> gap of roughly 20 cm .

# SSP 

{"target": " mobile phone ", "support_surface": 

"desk ", "references": [{"object": " keyboard ", 

"relation": " next_to ", "distance_cm":  15.0 }, 

{"object": " monitor ", "relation": " near ", 

"distance_cm":  25.0 }]} 

{"target": " mobile phone ", "support_surface": 

"table ", "references": [{"object": " keyboard ", 

"relation": " side_below ", "distance_cm": 

15.0 }, {"object": " mouse ", "relation": 

"side_below ", "distance_cm":  12.0 }]} 

Output:  The mobile phone  is on  the 

table , 23 cm away from the 

keyboard and 41 cm from the mouse. 

# Kimi K2.5 

InternVL3.5 -8B -Instruct 

Ground Truth:  {"target": "mobile phone", 

"support_surface": "table", "references": 

[{"object": "tripod", "relation": "above", 

"distance_cm": 2.4}, {"object": "table", 

"relation": "side_above", "distance_cm":  23.1}]} 

# Kimi K2.5 

InternVL3.5 -8B -Instruct 

Figure 7: Example 2. Drift of target-centered local spatial context in FSD and SSP for target mobile phone in scene 0b031f3119 .Both Kimi K2.5 and InternVL3.5-8B-Instruct produce scene-plausible but incorrectly grounded predictions, with errors in support surface, reference objects, spatial relations, and distances. Zhiyu Zhou, Peilin Liu, Ruoxuan Zhang, Luyang Zhang, Cheng Zhang, Hongxia Xie, and Wen-Huang Cheng SSP 

Output: {"target":" headphone 

case ","support_surface":" desk ","references":[{ 

"object":" tissue 

box ","relation":" next_to ","distance_cm": 10.0 }, 

{"object":" door ","relation":" near ","distance_c 

m": 20.0 }]} 

# Scene ：281ba69af1 

Question: Please describe in detail the final location 

of the  headphone case  in the scene, including its 

distance and relation to nearby objects. 

Ground Truth : The headphone case  is  on the table. 

It is also to the side of and below the speaker, 

about 12 cm away. It is further to the side of and 

below the monitor, about  17 cm away. 

Question: Please output the final location of 

the  headphone case  in structured JSON format. 

FSD FSD 

SSP SSP 

# FSD 

Output:  The headphone case ends up on the wooden desk 

along the wall,  near the left side of the tabletop. 

It ’s right beside a folded gray cloth and about  20 –30 

cm from a white tissue packet, with a plant just off 

to the desk ’s right. 

Output: {"target": " headphone case ", 

"support_surface": " chair" , "references": 

[{"object": " chair ", "relation": " on ", 

"distance_cm":  0.5 }, {"object": " table ", 

"relation": " next_to ", "distance_cm":  1.7 }]}   

> Output: The headphone case is located on the floor,
> approximately 23 cm away from the edge of the desk. It is
> positioned next to a black chair, which is about 41 cm
> away from the desk. The case appears to be resting on a
> blue towel that is spread out on the wooden floor.

# GPT -5.4 

LLaVA -OneVision -1.5 -8B 

Ground Truth:  {"target": "headphone case", 

"support_surface": "table", "references": 

[{"object": "speaker", "relation": 

"side_below", "distance_cm": 12.0}, {"object": 

"monitor", "relation": "side_below", 

"distance_cm": 17.1}]} 

# GPT -5.4 

SenseNova -SI -1.3 -InternVL3 -8B 

Figure 8: Example 3. Inconsistent grounding across free-form and structured outputs for target headphone case in scene 

281ba69af1 . Even when the target category is preserved, the models fail to maintain the same target-centered local spatial evidence, leading to incorrect support surfaces, reference objects, and spatial relations. PinpointQA: A Dataset and Benchmark for Small Object-Centric Spatial Understanding in Indoor Videos 

Figure 9: Human evaluation interface in the GT-Assisted setting.