Title: OmniShotCut: Holistic Relational Shot Boundary Detection with Shot-Query Transformer

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24762v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 02:21:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# OmniShotCut: Holistic Relational Shot Boundary Detection with Shot-Query Transformer 

Boyang Wang 1, Guangyi Xu 1, Zhipeng Tang 2, Jiahui Zhang 1, Zezhou Cheng 1

> 1

University of Virginia 2University of Massachusetts Amherst 

Project Page : Omni-Shot-Cut.github.io 

Abstract. Shot Boundary Detection (SBD) aims to automatically iden-tify shot changes and divide a video into coherent shots. While SBD was widely studied in the literature, existing state-of-the-art methods often produce non-interpretable boundaries on transitions, miss subtle yet harmful discontinuities, and rely on noisy, low-diversity annotations and outdated benchmarks. To alleviate these limitations, we propose 

OmniShotCut to formulate SBD as structured relational prediction, jointly estimating shot ranges with intra -shot relations and inter -shot relations, by a shot query-based dense video Transformer. To avoid im-precise manual labeling, we adopt a fully synthetic transition synthesis pipeline that automatically reproduces major transition families with precise boundaries and parameterized variants. We also introduce Om-niShotCutBench, a modern wide-domain benchmark enabling holistic and diagnostic evaluation. 

1 Introduction 

Modern video production is inherently compositional, where multiple shots are assembled through editing operations rather than captured in a single continuous take. The transitions between these shots follow artistic principles, spanning from abrupt hard cuts and jump cuts to gradual effects such as dissolves, fades, wipes, etc. To understand the structural composition of such edited videos, it is necessary to identify the most atomic temporal units, a group of frames that form a coherent shot. This task is known as Shot Boundary Detection (SBD). Shot Boundary Detection [29, 30, 33, 43] has long been regarded as a well-established problem in video understanding. However, despite its apparent ma-turity, progress in this area has largely stagnated. We revisit SBD from the per-spective of its downstream applications and ask: has the problem truly been well defined and solved, and is it addressed in the most efficient and scalable manner? We argue that current SBD pipelines remain limited along several practical axes. First, the predicted shots lack interpretability, as it is unclear whether a predicted boundary corresponds to a scene or an editing transition. For each detected shot, the output should not be limited to a simple temporal range, but should also include higher-level structural information that better supports downstream applications. For instance, in video generation [2, 35, 42], transition 

> arXiv:2604.24762v1 [cs.CV] 27 Apr 2026

2 B. Wang et al. (a) No Relational Information                         

> (b) Neglect Tiny Continuity Jump
> Sudden Jump: Abrupt Motion Discontinuity when editor
> crops a segment of the video.
> Failed on Traditional Shot Boundary Detection Model.
> Discontinues
> Shot A Shot B
> Shot A Shot B (c) Ambiguous Transition Boundaries
> Which frame marks the START and which marks the END of this transition?
> Answer: f 4 tis the transition start; f 11  transition end
> f1f3f4f5f2f6f7
> f8f9f10 f11 f14 f12 f13
> Boundary Detected Boundary Detected
> Transition Type Dissolve? Fade? Wipe? Cut?
> (d) Existing Benchmark Limitations
> BBC
> Only Nature Doc.
> RAI
> Only Talk Shows
> AutoShot Bench
> Only Advertisement
> BBC RAI AutoShot Bench
> Label Accuracy
> # of Transition Types
> Domain Diversity
> Ours

Fig. 1: Limitations of traditional Shot Boundary Detection models. (a) De-tected Shots are hard to interpret: predicted boundaries lack explicit transition seman-tics; (b) Sudden Jump is under-modeled and often missed; (c) Human annotations are unreliable for gradual transition with subtle start/end frames; (d) Existing benchmarks are outdated and have a narrow domain, failing to reflect modern internet editing di-versity. 

may be less critical, and clean vanilla shot segments are often preferred. To this end, we introduce intra -shot relation classification as the outputs of the model. The intra-label characterizes the shot itself, indicating whether it is a vanilla segment or a specific transition type. Second, previous SBD models fail to detect subtle yet harmful discontinuities (i.e., sudden jumps) that negatively affect downstream tasks. Sudden jump (see Fig. 1 (b)) introduces excessive abrupt motion or texture change in two con-secutive frames, which exert negative influence on motion tracking [17], video segmentation [12], latent video compression [2, 35, 42], and more downstream tasks. To this end, we introduce inter -shot relation classification. The inter-label captures its relationship with the preceding shot, modeling the cross-shot continuity relationship. Further, existing state-of-the-art SBD models, such as TransNetV2 [29] and AutoShot [43], rely on 3D CNN architectures that are not well-suited for our richer formulation. Instead, we design a shot query-based Transformer architecture that jointly optimizes all objectives through shared hidden states, enabling unified modeling of temporal shot range prediction and relational understanding. Third, supervised training by a human labeler is hard to locate subtle changes accurately (check Fig. 1 (c)). Prior works [3–5] heavily rely on manually anno-tated real-world data for shot boundary detection. However, transition labeling is highly labor-intensive and inherently imprecise. In particular, humans struggle to accurately localize subtle boundaries, such as the exact start and end frames of fading or dissolve effects, where minor changes in illumination and transparency are difficult to perceive. As a result, manual annotation is not well-suited for fine-grained transition modeling. More importantly, transition effects are in fact OmniShotCut 3

generated by video editing software ( e.g ., Apple iMovie or Adobe professional editing suites). Instead of investing costly human effort in reverse annotation, we propose a forward generation strategy that programmatically reproduces transi-tions (Fig. 2), which covers 9 main types and 30 subtypes, and yields hundreds of variations by sweeping controllable parameters in directions, edges, inten-sity, layout, and more. This methodology enables the construction of a synthetic training dataset with precise transition ranges, while covering rare yet realistic cases ( e.g ., mosaic, puzzle, cube, doorway) that are underrepresented in exist-ing datasets. Furthermore, naively stitching together unrelated videos does not reflect real-world editing patterns. To address this, we leverage a self-supervised learning method to group semantically similar videos from our million-scale video clips pool, thereby simulating more realistic transition contexts. Fourth, existing benchmarks contain noisy annotations, outdated and narrow domain video sources, and miss the focus of the sudden jump (as shown in Fig. 1 (d)), which fail to reflect the diversity and complexity of modern video content. To close this gap, we introduce OmniShotCutBench , a contemporary SBD benchmark that contains wide-domain, high complexity sources, along with our intra- and inter-shot relational labels. We hope OmniShotCutBench can offer a more holistic and diagnostic evaluation for modern Shot Boundary Detection. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 

– We reformulate Shot Boundary Detection by enriching each shot with both intra-shot and inter-shot relational information, moving beyond simple tem-poral range prediction. 

– We propose a shot query-based Transformer architecture that jointly opti-mizes range prediction and relational classification within a unified hidden state. 

– We present a fully synthetic pipeline for transition synthesis that automati-cally produces precise and diverse transition labels, eliminating the need for manual annotation during SBD training. 

– We introduce a new benchmark for modern shot boundary detection that captures diverse contemporary transition patterns, where our model shows state-of-the-art performance in various dimensions. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 Shot Boundary Detection 

Shot Boundary Detection [16] operates on native, full video sequence inputs without frame downsampling. It requires frame-level precision to localize each boundary. This inherently demands high-density temporal inputs for the model. Traditional approaches, such as PySceneDetect [8] and Koala-36M [37], primarily rely on handcrafted low-level features (e.g., color histogram differences or struc-tural similarity) to detect abrupt transitions. These methods are sensitive to illumination changes and often struggle to capture higher-level semantic consis-tency across frames. Deep learning-based methods have since become dominant, 4 B. Wang et al. Dissolve: Shot A gradually blends into Shot B Shot A Shot B Fade: Shot A fades to black, then Shot B appears Shot A Shot B          

> Wipe: Shot B replaces A via moving boundary Shot A Shot B Slide: Shot B slides over Shot AShot A Shot B
> Doorway: Two panels open revealing Shot B Shot A Shot B Zoom: Transition via rapid zoom into next shot Shot A Shot B
> Sudden Jump: Abrupt cut within same scene continuity Hard Cut: Instant switch from Shot A to B

Fig. 2: Main Transition Types. We consider a diverse and comprehensive set of video shot transitions that are largely underexplored in prior shot boundary detection works [29,30,43]. This figure illustrates several representative transition types, including dissolve, fade, wipe, slide, doorway, zoom, sudden jump, and hard cut. Each example shows the temporal progression from Shot A to Shot B with the transition region highlighted. We skip the Pushing effect demo here. More subtypes are provided in the supplementary. 

including DeepSBD [10], ClipShots [38], TransNetV2 [29], and AutoShot [43]. They employ 3D CNNs to detect transition intervals. To handle long sequences efficiently, these models often downsample spatial resolution aggressively (e.g., to 48 × 27 ) to reduce computational cost. To evaluate SBD, even though bench-marks like BBC [4], RAI [5], and IACC3 [3] are popularly used with correspond-ing training datasets, many shot cut labels lack a clear definition and neglect transitions and subtle motion discontinuity cases like sudden jumps. In addition, these datasets are primarily derived from legacy broadcast footage and do not reflect the diversity of modern video domains. 

Downstream Applications. Shot Boundary Detection has become increas-ingly important in dataset curation for internet-scale in-the-wild videos. In data curation, massive raw long-form videos must be segmented into temporally co-herent clips without abrupt changes. The temporal consistency of each clip is critical for training downstream models that demand continuous sequences of im-ages, like the video generation task. In state-of-the-art video generation, videos are encoded by a temporal VAE [35,42], where multiple frames share the same to-ken. If sudden jumps are not accurately detected, consecutive frames may exhibit drastic spatial shifts (e.g., a subject abruptly moving from left to right), signifi-cantly hindering temporal compression and modeling. Moreover, shot boundary detection models are widely used to filter in-the-wild online videos and have been incorporated into numerous recent datasets and benchmark works [20, 21] as the key component in curation preprocessing. In the scene segmentation task, MovieNet [13] provides a dataset that is first cropped by SBD, and then the following works, like LGSS [27], BaSSL [24], ShotCOL [9], and Scene-VLM [6], OmniShotCut 5

apply downsampled frames from the predicted shot boundaries to detect scene boundaries. This growing reliance further underscores the need for a more pre-cise, scalable, and transition-aware shot boundary detection model. 

2.2 Synthetic Data 

While supervised training on manually annotated pairs remains a standard ap-proach in vision, several domains have noted the difficulty of collecting precisely aligned data in certain tasks. As a result, synthetic data generation strategies [23] have been increasingly adopted, leveraging programmable forward transforma-tions to automatically construct large-scale labeled datasets. A representative example arises in low-level vision [15, 36, 39], where perfectly pixel-aligned de-graded inputs and original high-quality pairs are rarely available in real-world settings. Instead, their degraded images or videos are commonly synthesized via controlled resizing, noise simulation, realistic Gaussian blurring, and com-pression artifacts applied to high-quality ground-truth images. Similarly, prior research [38] in image forensics and editing detection has leveraged scripted pipelines to automatically synthesize Photoshop-manipulated images. For tran-sition modeling, where effects are typically synthesized by editing software, a programmatic synthesis strategy is therefore a principled and effective solution. Though previous works like TransnetV2 [29] and DeepSBD [10] mix real data with synthesized hard-cut and dissolve, most transition effects is lack of study, and we extend to dozens of transitions available. More importantly, we explore the extent to which purely synthetic training data can push the limits of syn-thetic supervision. 

3 Method 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

We define the problem as empowering traditional Shot Boundary Detection within an end-to-end model such that it not only predicts the temporal ranges of each shot, but also outputs the intra-relation classification of the shot itself and the inter-relation classification with respect to the previous shot. For intra-relation, we include 8 major categories, which includes vanilla General video, Dissolve, Wipe, Push, Slide, Zoom, Fade, and Doorway. For inter-relation, we classify whether the boundary corresponds to a Transition, a Hard Cut, or a Sudden Jump. 

3.2 Automatic Video Clip Curation 

To synthetically construct shot transitions, a clean video source pool is crucial. Our curation pipeline is shown in Fig. 3. We first apply basic parameter filtering on duration, resolution, frames-per-second (fps), and aspect ratio to all collected in-the-wild video sources and crop them into segments with a maximum dura-tion of 1 minute. To conservatively extract fluent video segments that contain no 6 B. Wang et al. 2. Basic Video Filter & Crop      

> 3. Video Continuity Check and Motion Filter
> Keep 50% Keep 15%
> Medium Motion Slow motion High Motion
> Keep 90%
> (a) Frame Similarity using DINOv3 Embedding
> Cosine Similarity
> 0.0
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Clip0 Clip1 Clip2
> Drop2 Drop1
> 𝛆 sim (Threshold)
> 5. Video Clip Fusion and Transition Synthesis
> 1. Diverse Internet Raw Video Collection (~2.5 Million Videos) 4. Automatic Semantic Clustering of Videos
> Download Download

…            

> Download Download
> Cluster #1 Transition1 Transition2
> Cluster #2
> Low < 400px High ≥ 400px
> 25 fps
> 10 fps sparse
> dense
> Keep Cropped
> (c) Max Duration Crop (≤ 1 min) (a) Video Resolution (b) FPS & Frame Count
> Frame t Frame t+1
> Video Motion Scoring based on Dense Pixel Tracking
> (b) Video Filtering based on Motion
> Videos Clustering using
> Frist -frame DINOv3 Embedding
> Nature
> Human
> House
> Clip1 Clip2 Clip3
> Transition1 Clip1 Clip2

Fig. 3: Large-scale transition source video curation. (1) We collect ∼2.5M raw videos from diverse Internet sources. (2) Videos are filtered based on resolution, frame rate, and duration constraints. (3) Temporal continuity and motion strength are ver-ified using frame-level semantic similarity and dense motion tracking. (4) Remaining videos are automatically clustered using the SSL data curation method [34] to group semantically similar videos. (5) Finally, video clips in the same and different clusters are fused to synthesize large-scale shot boundary detection training datasets. 

abrupt content change, inspired by motion evaluation of VBench [14], we encode frames sampled at a constant interval into DINO [28] embeddings, and compute the cosine similarity between consecutive embeddings. If the cosine similarity is higher than the threshold εsim , this indicates that the two frames are semanti-cally consistent and do not exhibit an abrupt hard cut or transitions changing. We continue this process until the similarity below εsim , at which point the clip is terminated. And then we refresh the cache and start finding the next video clip. Empirically, we observe that this approach is effective at identifying fading dark frames and dissolve-induced transparent frames, cropping out early when transitions start happening. Although this approach cannot guarantee that every extracted clip is completely clean, in subsequent synthetic transition generation, training with a large proportion of correctly labeled data can effectively mitigate the influence of noisy labels. In this paper, identifying the Sudden Jump is a critical task. Sudden Jump typically arise during video editing where a short period of segments is manually cropped, resulting in abrupt discontinuities, where the video cannot be regarded as a fluent shot. Thus, we believe that sudden jump is aligned with the purpose of the shot boundary detection task and should be solved in this domain. To incorporate into our shot boundary detection framework, we explicitly estimate the motion strength during the data curation stage. This enables us to select clips with medium-level motion intensity (neither too fast nor too slow) as suitable sources for constructing sudden jump samples. We estimate motion strength using the CoTracker3 [17] model, which provides dense tracking points with OmniShotCut 7a) Genre Distribution  b) Transition Type Distribution     

> Fig. 4: Left: Our curation pipeline scales to internet-scale, wide-domain video collec-tion and yields ∼1.5M curated clip source for transition synthesis; genres are annotated by Qwen3 [41]. Right: Transition statistics of the synthetic corpus. The inner ring shows the inter-shot relation distribution, and the outer ring breaks down all of the main and sub-transition types that our pipeline can synthesize. In total, we synthesize 11.9M transitions for training.

configurable grid density. By measuring the displacement magnitude of tracked points across frames and averaging over all frames, we obtain an overall motion strength score for each video. Further, another functionality of motion strength information is that it can be helpful to increase video clip pool complexity. This is because we observe that a large portion of raw clips exhibit small motion magnitudes; therefore, we filter out these slow-motion cases with weak dynamic patterns. This filtering also ensures that our synthetic data source better reflects high-dynamic, challenging scenarios commonly encountered in real-world videos. Once each video clip is properly curated, we want to group similar but not identical videos into the same cluster, such that the sources before and after a synthetic transition can be sampled from the same cluster pool to bet-ter simulate real-world video scenarios. We adopt the DINO representation and perform Self-Supervised Learning-based (SSL) clustering following the method-ology of [34]. For each video clip, we extract the DINO embedding of its first frame, directly reusing the embeddings computed during the earlier curation stage. And then, we apply a semantic deduplication [1] paradigm to filter in-stances whose cosine similarity is less than the threshold εdup in each cluster. This avoids near-duplicate videos when we are using large-scale random videos from the internet. Finally, we apply hierarchical K-means [34] clustering to group semantically similar embeddings. Each cluster represents a collection of videos sharing similar semantic content, like indoor scenes, vehicles, housing, moun-tains, and etc . The SSL method does not directly tell us what the content is, but it can ensure that the contents are perceptually similar and strongly related. Using the SSL clustering results as the basis for composition ensures that the pre- and post-transition clips are strongly correlated in semantic content, making the synthesized transitions more realistic to real-world video distribution. 8 B. Wang et al. 

3.3 Synthetic Transition Composition 

After the curation stage, we obtain a large collection of clean video clips. We then randomly choose videos from this pool and stitch clips together with diverse synthetic transitions. For in-the-wild videos, gradual transitions exhibit a highly biased distribution, with dissolve and fading effects dominating. As a result, manually collecting rare gradual transitions, such as doorway or wiping effects, is notoriously difficult. We instead adopt a synthetic strategy that enables a more principled and natural generation pipeline, providing a reproducible methodol-ogy for future researchers to extend and enrich with new transition types. As shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 4 (b), our transition set covers mainstream cate-gories and also includes fine-grained subtypes (additional examples are provided in the supplementary material). For intra-shot relation labels, we classify each video shot into vanilla video clip, dissolve , wiping , pushing , sliding , zooming ,

fading , and doorway transition effects. This decision is based on the observa-tion of the pre- and post-source movement patterns and professional terms in movie production. For inter-shot relations, we define hard-cut and sudden jump ,along with an auxiliary new-start label to indicate the first clip in the video, and 

transitions for videos involved as transition sources. In the synthesis, most video clips are sampled from the same SSL-grouped cluster pools as previous videos, while we also allow cross-cluster selection to re-flect the unpredictability of real-world video editing (see Fig. 3 (5)). For sudden jump cases, we restrict the video source selection to middle motion strength. Excessive camera or object motion often induces large structural changes, mak-ing it difficult to distinguish from hard cuts, whereas some small motion cases (e.g., static talk-show scenarios) yield changes that are barely perceptible even to humans. 

3.4 Shot Query-based Dense Video Transformer 

As shown in Fig. 5, we propose a Shot Query-based end-to-end video Trans-former model, which is composed of the image encoder, Transformer encoder, and Transformer decoder. We start from the image-based DETR [7] object de-tection Transformer model and introduce critical modifications for our task. The input consists of video frames of length F , height H, and width W , forming a tensor in RF ×H×W ×C . The video is first encoded by ResNet [11] as an image encoder in a frame-by-frame manner. The encoded per-frame features are fed into the Transformer encoder. We flatten the spatial and temporal dimensions into a single dimension, resulting in a feature map of size Rd×(F ·H·W ), where d is the hidden state dimension. Each Transformer encoder layer is composed of multi-head self-attention. Since our input shifts from images to videos, the tokens in the Transformer remain permutation-invariant by design, we need to extend the 2D position embedding to 3D position embedding, introducing additional positional information along the temporal dimension. Specifically, following the approach of VisTR [40], we OmniShotCut 9Shot Detection Outputs        

> Frame 121 Frame 1
> General shot
> Frame 165 Frame 122
> Dissolve Transition
> Frame 169 Frame 166
> General Shot
> Image Encoder
> In -the -wild videos
> ……
> Transformer Encoder
> Spatiotemporal Attention
> Transformer Decoder
> Learnable Shot Queries
> …
> Inter -Shot Self -Attention
> Shot -to -Frame Cross -Attention
> ……
> …
> …
> MLP MLP MLP
> Shot Range Intra -Shot Relation Inter -Shot Relation Video frame tokens
> …
> …
> …
> …
> …
> 3D Positional Embed. ⊕

Fig. 5: Shot Query-based Dense Video Transformer. Frame tokens from input videos are encoded using a spatiotemporal Transformer encoder with 3D positional embedding. Learnable shot queries in the decoder interact with frame features through cross-attention to predict shot range, intra-shot relation, and inter-shot relation. 

generalize the cumulative spatial coordinates (x, y) to 3D (t, y, x) and apply sinu-soidal embeddings along the temporal and spatial axes, enabling the Transformer to model joint spatiotemporal relationships in video inputs. The 3D position em-bedding will also be flattened to Rd×(F ·H·W ) and then added with the flattened video tokens before entering the Transformer encoder. The input to the Transformer decoder is a fixed-length set of trainable em-beddings, referred to as shot queries . At a high level, each shot query serves as a shot prediction slot, aggregating shot-specific evidence from the video sources into a compact hidden state for decoding. The entire Transformer decoder con-sists of multiple decoder layers. In each layer, the shot queries first undergo self-attention, followed by cross-attention with the tokens Rd×(F ·H·W ) produced by the Transformer encoder. The number of input shot queries is fixed. At the output stage, shot queries will predict a dedicated termination token to explicitly indicate the end of shot prediction when it reaches the last shot. All queries after the termination token are discarded, and only the preceding ones are considered valid predictions. Each shot query on the output of our Transformer decoder is passed through three heads: a range head, an intra-relation head, and an inter-relation head. Directly adopting DETR-style [19] formulation by replacing bounding box pre-diction with an L1 + 1D GIoU regression loss results in a suboptimal learning objective for temporal range prediction (check Sec. 4.3). Regression over nor-malized continuous coordinates is inherently ill-suited for accurate frame-level boundary localization across long sequences, where even a one-frame deviation at a hard-cut transition constitutes a significant error for the SBD task. To ad-dress this limitation, we reformulate range prediction as a discrete classification problem over frame indices, which provides improved localization precision and more stable optimization. Specifically, the range head predicts the index of the 10 B. Wang et al. Data Curation & Pre -processing  Annotator Training  Annotation  Verification                   

> Collect modern videos of
> different genres from
> multiple sources
> Define transition types
> following standard video
> editing tools and
> tutorials
> Refine labeling guideline
> via multi -round pilot
> annotations
> Annotate using self -
> developed tool with
> iterative boundary and
> label refinement
> 1234
> Relation
> Segment
> Confidence
> 021
> Perform multi -round
> inspection Constructing the final
> benchmark
> 100 mins videos
> 180,000+ frames
> More than 2700 cuts
> multiple inter or intra
> relations
> Game Vlog Sports
> Shorts Concert Movie

Fig. 6: An Overview of OmniShotCutBench Construction Pipeline. 

last frame of each shot pend , formulated as a classification problem where the number of classes equals the total number of frames. As shots in SBD are con-secutive and non-overlapping, the start of each shot is implicitly defined by the end of the previous one, with the first shot starting at frame 0. This classification formulation for the range prediction does not require post-processing of heuristic thresholding like prior SBD methods [29, 43]. Consequently, Hungarian match-ing [18] is no longer required. We retain auxiliary supervision at intermediate decoder layers to facilitate stable optimization. We optimize a weighted sum of three classification losses: 

L = λrange Lrange + λintra Lintra + λinter Linter , (1) where 

Lrange = 1

N

NX

i=1 

CE  pend 

i , y end 

i

 , (2) 

Lintra = 1

N

NX

i=1 

CE  pintra 

i , y intra 

i

 , (3) 

Linter = 1

N

NX

i=1 

CE  pinter 

i , y inter 

i

 . (4) 

3.5 Evaluation Benchmark 

We introduce OmniShotCutBench , a modern shot boundary detection bench-mark designed to comprehensively evaluate models’ performance on versatile transitions from modern internet video sources. The construction pipeline is shown in Fig. 6. Each shot range label is paired with a confidence score. This is because we recognize that human perception is inherently insensitive to subtle transition variations, particularly in transparent dissolve and fading effects. We collect diverse video sources with modern video editing techniques from the topics of vlog, anime, movie, concert, documentary, monitor recording, game, sports, etc. We randomly truncate the videos to one minute (or shorter) and standardize all videos to 480p resolution at 30 FPS to ensure consistent temporal precision, which is critical for accurate shot boundary localization. In total, we curate 114 videos, which is roughly 110 minutes of diverse, high-quality, and representative video sources. OmniShotCut 11 

To ensure high-quality annotations, following other datasets & benchmark works [21, 22], we mimic their high-standard curation paradigm, as shown in Fig. 6. All annotators first studied several professional video editing tutorials online and learning video editing applications like iMovie. Annotators were re-quired to review these materials prior to labeling to establish a clear understand-ing of transition taxonomy and visual characteristics. We then conducted multi-ple rounds of pilot annotations to align labeling criteria and ensure consistency across annotators. During the final annotation phase, ambiguous or contentious cases were systematically documented and resolved to maintain annotation qual-ity and consistency. Analysis and visualization of our benchmark are provided in the supplementary material. We will open-source this benchmark for future researches. 

4 Experiment 

4.1 Implementation Details 

In the curation stage, our video sources are mostly coming from existing video datasets on Huggingface, which include datasets like OpenVid [25], VidGen [32], Sakuga [26], GamePhysics [31], and several publicly accessible sources. we set continuous similarity threshold εsim to 0.9 and deduplication threshold εdup to 0.05. The motion tracking [17] is sampled per 3 frames at 256x320 resolution. The number of SSL clusters [34] is set to 27,000, where we use DINOv3 [28] ViT large variant. We discard cluster sizes that are less than 5 videos to avoid reusing the same video source. We construct our synthetic transition training data via a fully parameterized pipeline. The number of clips per video is sampled from a Poisson distribu-tion with λ = 7 .0 and constrained to [1 , 28] . Clip durations are sampled from Gaussian distributions of N (2 .8, 1.62) seconds. 75% of clips are selected from the same DINOv3 [28] cluster to maintain semantic coherence. For sudden-jump cases, we crop [24, 40] frames, and their valid source videos should be those with motion strength in the [25, 60] percentile range, sorted from slowest to fastest. We further assign 25% of the synthesis to be extremely short and dense com-position, where we generate continuous 28 videos that are within the duration of [0 .15 , 1.0] seconds for each clip. For the offline augmentation, we apply 5% on adding subtitle text, and 7.5% on the lighting variations. In total, we create 300K synthetic videos used for training, where each of them contains at least 240 frames at 24 fps. The quantity of synthesis videos can be infinite, but we set it to 300K videos as a reasonable range. More detailed parameter settings and design are provided in the supplementary. We train our model with 8 Nvidia A100 GPUs for 70 epochs, which is about 2 days. Since training resolution is only 128x96, we choose the smallest pre-trained ResNet18 [11] as the image encoder to maintain more spatial tokens after the encoder. We set 6 Transformer encoders and 6 Transformer decoders for our model. We set 24 fixed learnable shot query tokens as the input to the Transformer decoder. λrange , λ intra , λ inter is set to 5, 1, 1. The learning rate for 12 B. Wang et al. 

the ResNet backbone is set to 1e − 5, and the Transformer encoder and decoder learning rate is 1e − 4. The learning rate becomes half after 50 epochs. Total batch size across all GPUs is 64. We randomly crop 100 frames of the full video source for the training. In the training, we do several online augmentations. This includes horizontal and vertical flip, color jittering, blurring, Gaussian and Poisson noises, and compression artifacts [36]. 

4.2 Experiment Results 

Though our model jointly outputs the relational label, our capability is mainly inherited from shot boundary detection. To evaluate traditional shot boundary detection, we choose to compare with mainstream baselines in the literature, which include non-learning-based method PySceneDetect [8], and previous state-of-the-art learning-based methods by 3D CNNs, which include TransNet V2 [29] and AutoShot [43]. The evaluation is done on OmniShotCutBench. Our evaluation considers tra-ditional shot range precision, recall, and F1 metrics, which are based on the ShotBench in Cosmos [2]. We use their default tolerance of 2 frames. Further, we specialize in the analysis of the transition of the IoU and sudden jump accu-racy. For transition IoU, we select the GT shots that are labeled with a transition label, and find the closest prediction results to calculate the IoU, applying our human label confidence to dynamically adjust the tolerance range. For sudden jump accuracy, we identify all ground-truth inter-relation labels corresponding to sudden jumps and measure the proportion of correctly predicted shot cuts at the same frame index. A zero tolerance is applied, as the transition is expected to occur instantaneously. We further evaluate intra- and inter-relation classifica-tion accuracy, which is the number of correct classifications divided by the total number of shots. For each ground-truth shot, the predicted shot with the highest IoU is selected and used for classification comparison. All metrics count across all videos in the benchmark, instead of the average per video. This is because the number of cuts is unbalanced in different videos. Tab. 1 reports the quantitative results on our benchmark. Traditional shot boundary detection methods such as PySceneDetect [8], TransNetV2 [29], and AutoShot [43] achieve reasonable performance on overall range-based metrics, with F1 scores between 0.75 and 0.82. However, they exhibit clear limitations in transition localization and sudden jump detection. In particular, transition IoU remains low (0.18–0.25), indicating that predicted boundaries are often only roughly aligned with the true transition ranges. Sudden jump precision is also limited, suggesting difficulty in reliably detecting instantaneous discontinuities. In contrast, our method significantly improves transition localization, achieving a transition IoU of 0.632, substantially outperforming all baselines. It also achieves the best range F1 score of 0.883. Moreover, our framework enables structured relation prediction, reaching 0.959 intra-shot accuracy and 0.836 inter-shot ac-curacy, which are not supported by prior methods. The visual result is available in the supplementary. OmniShotCut 13                                                                

> Table 1: Quantitative comparison with existing shot boundary detection methods. We first analyze transition localization and sudden jump detection, and report tradi-tional shot range precision, recall, and F1 following Cosmos ShotBench [2]. Our method additionally predicts intra-shot and inter-shot relations, for which we report the cor-responding classification accuracy. All metrics are the higher the better. The best is
> highlighted .Method Transition IoU Sudden Jump Acc. Range Precision Range Recall Range F1 Intra Acc. Inter Acc. PySceneDetect [8] 0.183 0.416 0.833 0.689 0.754 --TransNet V2 [29] 0.192 0.261 0.913 0.734 0.814 --AutoShot [43] 0.252 0.455 0.849 0.782 0.814 --
> Ours 0.632 0.761 0.898 0.858 0.883 0.959 0.836 Table 2: Ablation Study. All metrics are the higher the better. Method Transition IoU Sudden Jump Acc. Range Precision Range Recall Range F1 Intra Acc. Inter Acc.
> Base 0.626 0.568 0.844 0.781 0.811 0.953 0.770
> L1+ GIoU Loss 0.683 0.319 0.582 0.695 0.633 0.935 0.733
> −Dino Selection 0.597 0.436 0.856 0.737 0.792 0.950 0.739
> +Short Dense Hard-Cut 0.688 0.643 0.827 0.840 0.834 0.955 0.788

4.3 Ablation Study 

In this section, we conduct ablation studies to examine the impact of key com-ponents on our performance. Due to computational constraints, all ablations are evaluated using checkpoints from the 20th training epoch. Results are summa-rized in Tab. 2. For the first study, we examine whether the DETR-style range regression objective ( L1 + 1D GIoU) [7] is preferable to our default formulation, which converts boundary estimation to discrete classification. In our model, we directly predict discrete boundary labels and reuse the previous estimate to form a closed-loop refinement over time. For the L1 + 1D GIoU variant, the model outputs are passed through a sigmoid to map into [0 , 1] range, and then scaled by the maximum prediction length (100 frames in our training). Default 2D GIoU is changed to a 1D version, based on [19]. As shown in the first two rows of Tab. 2, 

L1 + 1D GIoU can slightly improve transition IoU, but it degrades substantially under stricter criteria, such as zero-tolerance sudden jump accuracy and range precision. We attribute this drop to the inherent difficulty of regression losses in resolving the last 1–2 frames precisely, which is crucial for abrupt hard-cut and sudden-jump boundaries. Second, we study the effect of sampling clips from the same DINO [28] cluster versus purely random selection. In our base setting, we follow the SSL-based data 14 B. Wang et al. 

curation strategy [34] and sample from the same cluster with 75% probability, while using random sampling for the remaining 25% . We then construct a variant where all clips are selected uniformly at random ( 100% random). Comparing the first and third row of Tab. 2, fully random sampling leads to consistent performance drops across almost all metrics. We attribute this to the situation that semantically aligned clips yield more challenging synthesized transitions: the model must rely on fine-grained temporal and structural cues to distinguish subtle content changes, rather than trivially separating clips by large semantic gaps. Third, we aim to determine if assigning more continuous, dense hard cuts in the synthetic data preparation is helpful. This is because we observe that naively randomly choosing the transition types in the pool is biased from the real-world data distribution. In real-world data, a certain number of videos only include hard cuts where each clip is shorter than 10 frames. If everything is random, we could only observe less than 0.005% of the data that has more than 5 continuous hard-cuts. We try to change the synthetic data distribution by setting 25% of the synthetic data to be formulated in this pattern, and we can observe improvement on most metrics based on the first and last row of the Tab. 2. The increase in sudden jump accuracy and range recall indicates that more missing cuts are detected. This denotes that understanding real-world transition distribution and crafting the synthesis data to be closer to the real-world distribution is helpful. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present OmniShotCut , reformulating shot boundary detec-tion with explicit intra -shot and inter -shot relations by a query-based Trans-former framework. To overcome the limitations of manual annotation, we de-velop a fully synthetic data synthesis pipeline that automatically produces di-verse transition effects with precise temporal supervision, and curate a modern complex shot boundary detection benchmark. Experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our results suggest that fully synthetic supervision provides a scalable and effective paradigm for next-generation shot boundary detection datasets. Moreover, our insights into intra-and inter-shot relations may further benefit downstream applications that re-quire more accurate and explainable shot boundary detection. 

5.1 Limitation 

More sophisticated artistic and semantically dynamic transitions may require ad-ditional modeling beyond our current synthetic parameterization. In particular, capturing complex cinematic transition patterns could benefit from large-scale industry-level transition template collections, which are not publicly available. Exploring such resources remains an interesting direction for future work. OmniShotCut 15 

6 Acknowledgment 

The authors acknowledge the NVIDIA Academic Grant Program Award, Adobe Research Gift, MathWorks Research Award, the University of Virginia Research Computing and Data Analytics Center, Advanced Micro Devices AI and HPC Cluster Program, Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Ser-vices & Support (ACCESS) program, and National Artificial Intelligence Re-search Resource (NAIRR) Pilot for computational resources, including the Anvil supercomputer (National Science Foundation award OAC 2005632) at Purdue University and the Delta and DeltaAI advanced computing resources (National Science Foundation award OAC 2005572). 

References 

1. Abbas, A., Tirumala, K., Simig, D., Ganguli, S., Morcos, A.S.: Semdedup: Data-efficient learning at web-scale through semantic deduplication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09540 (2023) 2. Agarwal, N., Ali, A., Bala, M., Balaji, Y., Barker, E., Cai, T., Chattopadhyay, P., Chen, Y., Cui, Y., Ding, Y., et al.: Cosmos world foundation model platform for physical ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03575 (2025) 3. Awad, G., Butt, A.A., Fiscus, J., Joy, D., Delgado, A., Mcclinton, W., Michel, M., Smeaton, A.F., Graham, Y., Kraaij, W., et al.: Trecvid 2017: evaluating ad-hoc and instance video search, events detection, video captioning, and hyperlinking. In: TREC video retrieval evaluation (TRECVID) (2017) 4. Baraldi, L., Grana, C., Cucchiara, R.: A deep siamese network for scene detection in broadcast videos. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international conference on Multimedia. pp. 1199–1202 (2015) 5. Baraldi, L., Grana, C., Cucchiara, R.: Shot and scene detection via hierarchical clustering for re-using broadcast video. In: International conference on computer analysis of images and patterns. pp. 801–811. Springer (2015) 6. Berman, N., Botach, A., Ben-Baruch, E., Hakimi, S.H., Gendler, A., Naiman, I., Yosef, E., Kviatkovsky, I.: Scene-vlm: Multimodal video scene segmentation via vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21778 (2025) 7. Carion, N., Massa, F., Synnaeve, G., Usunier, N., Kirillov, A., Zagoruyko, S.: End-to-end object detection with transformers. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 213–229. Springer (2020) 8. Castellano, B.: Pyscenedetect: Python and opencv-based scene cut/transition de-tection program & library. https://github.com/Breakthrough/PySceneDetect 

(2025), software 9. Chen, S., Nie, X., Fan, D., Zhang, D., Bhat, V., Hamid, R.: Shot contrastive self-supervised learning for scene boundary detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 9796–9805 (2021) 10. Hassanien, A., Elgharib, M., Selim, A., Bae, S.H., Hefeeda, M., Matusik, W.: Large-scale, fast and accurate shot boundary detection through spatio-temporal convo-lutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03281 (2017) 11. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 770–778 (2016) 16 B. Wang et al. 12. Hu, H., Ying, K., Ding, H.: Segment anything across shots: A method and bench-mark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13715 (2025) 13. Huang, Q., Xiong, Y., Rao, A., Wang, J., Lin, D.: Movienet: A holistic dataset for movie understanding. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 709–727. Springer (2020) 14. Huang, Z., He, Y., Yu, J., Zhang, F., Si, C., Jiang, Y., Zhang, Y., Wu, T., Jin, Q., Chanpaisit, N., et al.: Vbench: Comprehensive benchmark suite for video gener-ative models. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 21807–21818 (2024) 15. Jeelani, M., Cheema, N., Illgner-Fehns, K., Slusallek, P., Jaiswal, S., et al.: Expand-ing synthetic real-world degradations for blind video super resolution. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 1199–1208 (2023) 16. Kar, T., Kanungo, P., Mohanty, S.N., Groppe, S., Groppe, J.: Video shot-boundary detection: issues, challenges and solutions. Artificial Intelligence Review 57 (4), 104 (2024) 17. Karaev, N., Makarov, Y., Wang, J., Neverova, N., Vedaldi, A., Rupprecht, C.: Cotracker3: Simpler and better point tracking by pseudo-labelling real videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 6013–6022 (2025) 18. Kuhn, H.W.: The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics quarterly 2(1-2), 83–97 (1955) 19. Lei, J., Berg, T.L., Bansal, M.: Detecting moments and highlights in videos via natural language queries. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 ,11846–11858 (2021) 20. Li, Z., Li, C., Mao, X., Lin, S., Li, M., Zhao, S., Xu, Z., Li, X., Feng, Y., Sun, J., et al.: Sekai: A video dataset towards world exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15675 (2025) 21. Lin, Z., Cen, S., Jiang, D., Karhade, J., Wang, H., Mitra, C., Ling, T., Huang, Y., Liu, S., Chen, M., et al.: Towards understanding camera motions in any video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15376 (2025) 22. Liu, H., He, J., Jin, Y., Zheng, D., Dong, Y., Zhang, F., Huang, Z., He, Y., Li, Y., Chen, W., et al.: Shotbench: Expert-level cinematic understanding in vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21356 (2025) 23. Mumuni, A., Mumuni, F., Gerrar, N.K.: A survey of synthetic data augmentation methods in machine vision. Machine Intelligence Research 21 (5), 831–869 (2024) 24. Mun, J., Shin, M., Han, G., Lee, S., Ha, S., Lee, J., Kim, E.S.: Bassl: Boundary-aware self-supervised learning for video scene segmentation. In: Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 4027–4043 (2022) 25. Nan, K., Xie, R., Zhou, P., Fan, T., Yang, Z., Chen, Z., Li, X., Yang, J., Tai, Y.: Openvid-1m: A large-scale high-quality dataset for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02371 (2024) 26. Pan, Z.: Sakuga-42m dataset: Scaling up cartoon research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07425 (2024) 27. Rao, A., Xu, L., Xiong, Y., Xu, G., Huang, Q., Zhou, B., Lin, D.: A local-to-global approach to multi-modal movie scene segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 10146– 10155 (2020) 28. Siméoni, O., Vo, H.V., Seitzer, M., Baldassarre, F., Oquab, M., Jose, C., Khali-dov, V., Szafraniec, M., Yi, S., Ramamonjisoa, M., et al.: Dinov3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 (2025) OmniShotCut 17 29. Soucek, T., Lokoc, J.: Transnet v2: An effective deep network architecture for fast shot transition detection. In: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Confer-ence on Multimedia. pp. 11218–11221 (2024) 30. Souček, T., Moravec, J., Lokoč, J.: Transnet: A deep network for fast detection of common shot transitions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03363 (2019) 31. Taesiri, M.R., Macklon, F., Bezemer, C.P.: Clip meets gamephysics: Towards bug identification in gameplay videos using zero-shot transfer learning. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories. pp. 270–281 (2022) 32. Tan, Z., Yang, X., Qin, L., Li, H.: Vidgen-1m: A large-scale dataset for text-to-video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02629 (2024) 33. Tang, S., Feng, L., Kuang, Z., Chen, Y., Zhang, W.: Fast video shot transition lo-calization with deep structured models. In: Asian Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 577–592. Springer (2018) 34. Vo, H.V., Khalidov, V., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Smetanin, N., Szafraniec, M., Touvron, H., Couprie, C., Oquab, M., Joulin, A., et al.: Automatic data cu-ration for self-supervised learning: A clustering-based approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15613 (2024) 35. Wan, T., Wang, A., Ai, B., Wen, B., Mao, C., Xie, C.W., Chen, D., Yu, F., Zhao, H., Yang, J., et al.: Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 (2025) 36. Wang, B., Liu, B., Liu, S., Yang, F.: Vcisr: Blind single image super-resolution with video compression synthetic data. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision. pp. 4302–4312 (2024) 37. Wang, Q., Shi, Y., Ou, J., Chen, R., Lin, K., Wang, J., Jiang, B., Yang, H., Zheng, M., Tao, X., et al.: Koala-36m: A large-scale video dataset improving consistency between fine-grained conditions and video content. In: Proceedings of the Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 8428–8437 (2025) 38. Wang, S.Y., Wang, O., Owens, A., Zhang, R., Efros, A.A.: Detecting photoshopped faces by scripting photoshop. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision. pp. 10072–10081 (2019) 39. Wang, X., Xie, L., Dong, C., Shan, Y.: Real-esrgan: Training real-world blind super-resolution with pure synthetic data. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF in-ternational conference on computer vision. pp. 1905–1914 (2021) 40. Wang, Y., Xu, Z., Wang, X., Shen, C., Cheng, B., Shen, H., Xia, H.: End-to-end video instance segmentation with transformers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 8741–8750 (2021) 41. Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al.: Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025) 42. Yang, Z., Teng, J., Zheng, W., Ding, M., Huang, S., Xu, J., Yang, Y., Hong, W., Zhang, X., Feng, G., et al.: Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 (2024) 43. Zhu, W., Huang, Y., Xie, X., Liu, W., Deng, J., Zhang, D., Wang, Z., Liu, J.: Autoshot: A short video dataset and state-of-the-art shot boundary detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2238–2247 (2023) 18 B. Wang et al. 

7 Supplementary Overview 

This supplementary material provides more implementation and technical details and additional qualitative visualization to complement the main manuscript. In Sec. 8, we present full transition genre types. In Sec. 9, we present more information about the transition synthesis parameter setting. In Sec. 10, we present the benchmark annotation GUI and details. In Sec. 11, we present the visual comparisons between different models. 

8 Full Transition Genre Types 

In the main paper, we provide the main transition type visualization. However, this is still not all the types we consider. We consider numerous subtypes in transition and classify them into different categories based on the pattern. The visualization is shown in Fig. 7. We consider a diverse taxonomy of editing transitions covering both common and fine-grained variants. Specifically, the transition set includes Dissolve tran-sitions (Transparent Dissolve, Cross-Blur Dissolve, and Ripple Dissolve); Wipe transitions (Unidirectional Wipe, Diagonal Wipe, Circular Wipe, Bar Wipe, Rip-ple Wipe, Page-Curl Wipe, and Mosaic Wipe); Push transitions (Unidirectional Push and Puzzle Push); Slide transitions (Horizontal Slide, Whip-Pan Slide, and Cube Slide); Zoom transitions (Zoom In/Out, Spin In/Out, Cross Zoom, and Swap Zoom); Fade transitions (Fade to Black, Fade to White, Fade from Black, Fade from White, Dip to Black, and Dip to White); and Doorway transitions (Doorway Open). 

9 Transition Synthesis Details 

In this section, we share our transition synthesis details, which are the key to our training dataset construction. The distribution of each transition is different. We sample 35% for the hard cut. In the dissolve type transition, 9.4% is distributed for the transparent dissolve, 2.4% for the cross-blur dissolve, and 1.8% for the ripple dissolve. In the wipe type transition, 4.7% is distributed evenly for the vanilla wipe in up, down, bottom, and right directions, 2.4% for spin wipe, 2.4% for circle open and close wipe, 1.2% for the bar wipe, 1.2% for the ripple wipe, and 1.2% for the mosaic wipe. In the push-type transition, 4.7% is distributed evenly for the vanilla push in up, down, bottom, and right directions, and 1.8% for the puzzle blending push. In the slide-type transition, 4.7% is distributed evenly for the vanilla slide, 4.1% for the whip pan, and 1.8% for the cube slide. In the zoom-type transition, 2.4% is distributed for the zoom in, 2.4% for the zoom out, 2.4% for the spin in and out, 1.2% for the cross zoom, and 1.8% for the swap. In the fading-type transition, 2.9% is distributed for fading the first source to black or white screen, 2.9% for fading the second source from black or white screen, and 2.9% for the dip fading effect. In the doorway transition, 2.9% is distributed. OmniShotCut 19 Dip to White 

> Wipe Bars
> Whip Pan
> Spin In
> Swap
> Fade to Black
> Spin Out
> Wipe Circle Open
> Wipe Spin
> Fade from White
> Fade from Black
> Push
> Mosaic
> Cross Blur
> Puzzle Blend
> Cross Zoom
> Ripple Dissolve
> Cube
> Ripple Open

Fig. 7: Full Transition Types . We complement the transition types listed in the main paper section. 

For all transition types, we carefully control as many parameters as possible to ensure consistency and precise manipulation. This yields a large set of explicit control philosophies spanning (i) discrete mode switches (e.g., transition direc-tion, hard vs. soft edges, constant vs. linear smoothing), (ii) temporal controls (including the start time, duration, and the speed curve of the transition over time), (iii) spatial controls (anchor locations and margins for added text, effect centers for zoom/ripple, grid resolution for mosaic, doorway seam orientation), and (iv) intensity controls (blurring range and curve shape, zoom magnitude and sampling density, lighting gains/gamma/contrast and color wash/spotlight strength, feather widths for soft boundaries). Additionally, we control content-level factors such as text selection and layout (wrapping, line count, spacing), while dropping near-duplicate frames on the edge of transition phases. Overall, our transition synthesis pipeline defines a reproducible distribution over diverse transitions with fine-grained, interpretable parameters that can be tuned. We construct our synthetic multi-shot training data via a fully parameterized transition generation pipeline that explicitly controls clip composition, temporal allocation, and boundary dynamics. The number of clips per video is sampled from a Poisson distribution with λ = 7 .0 and constrained to [1 , 28] . Clip dura-20 B. Wang et al. ① Load extracted frames  ② Select a video case    

> ③Add or modify
> shot boundaries ④Annotate segment type,
> relation, and confidence

Fig. 8: Benchmark Annotation Tool . Annotators first load extracted frames and select a video case. Shot boundaries are created by clicking between frames along the timeline. The right panel provides an overview of segments and enables labeling of type, relation, and confidence. Additional features, including multi-selection, auto-save, and frame-level inspection, facilitate efficient dataset construction. 

tions are sampled from Gaussian distributions, where N (2 .8, 1.62) seconds for multi-clip cases and N (8 .0, 1.02) seconds for single-clip cases, where we want to mimic video inputs with no transition at all. 75% of clips are drawn from the same DINOv3 [28] cluster to maintain semantic coherence, and we discard clusters whose size is less than 5 videos to avoid reusing the same video source. Before the first clip, there is 25 % to have a fade-in with a duration of [0 .33 , 1.5] 

seconds. Transition durations are sampled in [0 .15 , 2.5] seconds for the regular cases, but whip-pan is set for [0 .15 , 0.4] seconds to mimic a high motion scenario, and transitions shorter than three frames are replaced by hard cuts. To model abrupt discontinuities, hard cuts are augmented with sudden jumps with 90% 

probability, cutting [24 , 40] frames in the middle motion strength range. The middle motion range is set to around [25 , 60] percentile, sorted from the slowest to the fastest. We further assign 25% of the synthesis to be extremely short and dense composition, where we generate continuous 28 videos that are within the duration of [0 .15 , 1.0] seconds for each clip. For the offline augmentation, we apply 5% on adding subtitle text, and 7.5% on the lighting variations. This pa-rameterization enables scalable synthesis of temporally diverse and structurally realistic multi-shot video synthesis. OmniShotCut 21 

> Fig. 9: Annotation Tool Open-Image Inspection Mode . The Inspection mode shows the high resolution and labeling details for the annotators to define subtle tran-sition changes accurately. It can be played as videos fluently by pressing the buttons to check gradual transitions frame-by-frame.

10 Benchmark Annotation Details 

As shown in Fig. 8, we develop an annotation tool for our OmniShotCut bench. This tool helps us swiftly locate the boundaries on the per-frame level and label dense transition cases for long video instances. To facilitate efficient annotation, we implement several useful features. A floating window dynamically displays the current segment’s labels (type and confidence) or the relation label, allowing annotators to quickly verify existing annotations. In addition, the tool supports multi-selection, enabling annotators to label multiple segments or relations si-multaneously with a single action. An auto-save mechanism is also integrated to automatically store labeling progress and prevent data loss. Certain transitions of interest in our benchmark, such as sudden jumps, dis-solves, and fades, often involve subtle frame-level changes that require careful inspection. To address this, we introduce an open-image inspection mode (see Fig. 9). Annotators can open a frame by double-clicking or pressing the space bar, which displays the frame along with its associated type, confidence, and re-lation annotations. Using the left and right arrow keys, annotators can navigate through frames sequentially, effectively previewing the sequence as a short video clip. These features together provide an efficient and user-friendly platform for constructing and verifying our benchmark dataset. A preview of the videos in the benchmark is shown in Fig. 10. 22 B. Wang et al.  

> Fig. 10: OmniShotCut Bench Sample Images . Our benchmark covers diverse topics spanning lifestyle, sports, entertainment, anime, game, unboxing, vlog, shorts, tutorials, urban scenes, screen-based media, and etc .

11 Visual Comparisons 

The visual comparison result is shown in Fig. 11. As we can see, our model succeeded in the fading and dissolve transition as well as sudden jump detection. Baseline models like TransNet V2 [29] and AutoShot [43] failed, where they usually choose the start frame in the middle of the dissolve or fading effects. This confusing first frame is not friendly for the downstream applications like video generation, where they demand a clear first frame source for the image-to-video generation. Our result aligns with the ground-truth labels. Further, these baselines cannot realize the sudden jump, which lacks sensitivity to the subtle changes. OmniShotCut 23 AutoShot TransNet V2 

GT Ours 

AutoShot TransNet V2 

Ours GT 

AutoShot TransNet V2 

> Video 1  Video 2  Video 3

Ours GT 

Fig. 11: Shot Boundary Detection Qualitative Comparisons . We compare TransNet V2 [29], AutoShot [43], and ours on Fading (video 1), Sudden Jump (video 2), and Dissolve (video 3). Each vertical bar with the same color denotes the start and end of a clip cut by the model. Zoom in for the best view.