Title: SonoSelect: Efficient Ultrasound Perception via Active Probe Exploration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.05933v2

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 01:01:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# SonoSelect: Efficient Ultrasound Perception via Active Probe Exploration 

# Yixin Zhang 

Shandong University China 

# Yunzhong Hou 

Beijing Institute of Technology China 

# Longqi Li 

Shandong University China 

# Zhenyue Qin 

Yale University USA 

# Yang Liu 

Carnegie Mellon University USA 

# Yue Yao ∗

Shandong University China 

## Abstract 

Ultrasound perception typically requires multiple scan views through probe movement to reduce diagnostic ambiguity, mitigate acous-tic occlusions, and improve anatomical coverage. However, not all probe views are equally informative. Exhaustively acquiring a large number of views can introduce substantial redundancy, increase scanning and processing costs. To address this, we define an active view exploration task for ultrasound and propose SonoSelect, an ultrasound-specific method that adaptively guides probe movement based on current observations. Specifically, we cast ultrasound ac-tive view exploration as a sequential decision-making problem. Each new 2D ultrasound view is fused into a 3D spatial memory of the observed anatomy, which guides the next probe position. On top of this formulation, we propose an ultrasound-specific objective that favors probe movements with greater organ coverage, lower reconstruction uncertainty, and less redundant scanning. Experi-ments on the ultrasound simulator show that SonoSelect achieves promising multi-view organ classification accuracy using only 2 out of N views. Furthermore, for a more difficult kidney cyst detection task, it reaches 54.56% kidney coverage and 35.13% cyst coverage, with short trajectories consistently centered on the target cyst. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Applied computing → Health informatics ; • Computing method-ologies → Computer vision .

## Keywords 

Robotic Ultrasound, Multi-view Perception, View Selection 

## 1 Introduction 

In medical ultrasound, perception typically requires multiple scan views through probe movement to reduce diagnostic ambiguity. As a non-invasive and real-time imaging modality, ultrasound is essen-tial in clinical diagnosis, yet remains highly view-dependent [ 8, 21 ]. A single static image often fails to provide sufficient structural in-formation due to acoustic occlusions and a limited field-of-view [ 18 ,26 ]. Consequently, multi-view perception through probe reposi-tioning is necessary to improve anatomical coverage and reduce diagnostic uncertainty [5, 18, 20]. However, not all probe views are equally informative. Exhaus-tively acquiring a large number of views can introduce substantial redundancy and increase scanning and processing costs. In manual     

> ∗Corresponding author. ✗useless
> exploration
> skin surface
> Uninformed exploration SonoSelect
> overlying
> organ
> ✓targeted
> view
> cyst occluded cyst diagnosed
> skin surface

Figure 1: Uninformed exploration vs. active view exploration with SonoSelect. (Left): Uninformed exploration may sample views redundantly and very likely fail to reach the target cyst occluded behind an overlying organ. (Right): SonoSelect selects the next probe position based on current observations, directing the probe toward the target cyst for diagnosis. 

practice, selecting which views to acquire relies on the experience of the operator, requiring repeated repositioning and real-time interpretation, which makes the process time-consuming, operator-dependent, and difficult to standardize [ 18 , 20 , 21 ]. To reduce this operator burden, existing methods attempt to automate probe navi-gation [ 2, 17 ], yet most of these methods optimize probe movement based on immediate geometric or image-quality feedback without maintaining a spatial memory of the observed anatomy [ 2, 19 ]. These approaches may therefore acquire redundant views while missing viewpoints that could resolve occlusions or reveal unseen anatomy. A key question is then how to determine, from partial ob-servations, which probe positions to acquire next so as to maximize diagnostic coverage within a limited scanning budget. To address this, we define an active view exploration task for ultrasound. As illustrated in Fig. 1, uninformed exploration samples views redundantly within a local region, leaving the target unob-served when it is occluded behind an overlying organ (Fig. 1, left). In contrast, active view exploration selects the next probe position based on current observations, directing the probe toward the tar-get for diagnosis (Fig. 1, right). This definition reduces redundant acquisition and increases the likelihood of obtaining the specific viewpoints needed for accurate diagnosis. We propose SonoSelect, an ultrasound-specific method, to ad-dress this task. Specifically, we cast ultrasound active view explo-ration as a sequential decision-making problem. As the probe moves, each new 2D ultrasound view is fused into a 3D spatial memory 

> arXiv:2604.05933v2 [cs.CV] 8 Apr 2026 Zhang et al.

that represents what has been observed so far. This spatial memory then serves two purposes: it provides the agent with a volumet-ric summary of the current anatomical coverage, and it identifies regions that remain unobserved or uncertain, guiding where to scan next. Building on this representation, we design a reward that encourages probe movements toward greater organ coverage, lower reconstruction uncertainty, and less redundant scanning. To optimize this reward, SonoSelect decomposes the task into a view selection module trained with Q-learning for long-horizon routing and an action refinement module trained with PPO for short-range probe control, so that each sub-problem operates at its own tempo-ral scale. A preliminary study on multi-view organ classification shows that a small number of adaptively chosen views can match or ex-ceed the all-view baseline, and that the optimal views vary across patient anatomies. Building on this observation, we further eval-uate SonoSelect on a kidney cyst detection task, where the target is small and often occluded behind overlying organs. SonoSelect achieves higher organ and cyst coverage than conventional base-lines, with trajectories that consistently converge toward the target rather than exhaustively scanning the volume. In particular, un-like standard RL approaches that show substantial performance degradation on unseen anatomies, SonoSelect maintains its cover-age advantage across different patients, suggesting that the spatial memory provides a more generalizable basis for probe guidance than reward-driven exploration alone. The proposed active view exploration approach has practical implications for both current clinical workflows and robotic ultra-sound systems that automate probe positioning through mechanical arms. In current practice, the learned policy can serve as a deci-sion support tool, suggesting informative scanning regions to assist sonographers during manual examination. For robotic systems, the selected next-best-view can be converted into target coordinates for a mechanical arm controller, providing the spatial goal that downstream motion planning modules use to reposition the probe. 

## 2 Related Work 

Ultrasound Perception. Most research in ultrasound perception focuses on analyzing individual 2D views for tasks such as organ segmentation, anatomical classification, lesion detection, and rep-resentation learning. Velikova et al. [ 26 ] proposed LOTUS to learn transferable ultrasound representations for downstream view-level tasks. UltraFedFM [ 16 ] scaled this line to federated self-supervised pretraining across institutions, organs, and modalities, substan-tially improving diagnosis and segmentation. In a visibility-aware setting, Weld et al. identified visible tissue and acoustic shadows by modeling probe-tissue contact confidence in intraoperative ul-trasound [ 28 ]. Sonomate [ 10 ] further extended ultrasound under-standing to vision-language modeling for anatomy detection and question answering. These studies have substantially improved the interpretation of individual ultrasound views, but they generally assume that informative views are already available. To obtain richer anatomical observations beyond a single view, recent studies have explored robotic probe control, autonomous scanning, and target-view acquisition. Hase et al. [ 11 ] learned probe control for target-view recovery. Men et al. [ 20 ] coupled gaze cues with probe guidance for obstetric ultrasound scanning. Jiang et al. [15 ] developed autonomous carotid ultrasonography by combining robotic scanning with learned perception, and Jiang 

et al. [ 17 ] further studied intelligent robotic sonography through reward learning from a few demonstrations. Duan et al. [ 7] intro-duced safety-aware policy optimization for autonomous scanning, while Su et al. [ 25 ] used tissue-view maps to guide structure-specific acquisition. SonoGym [ 1] further provides a scalable simulation platform for learning-based robotic ultrasound. Overall, these meth-ods advance robotic scanning and target-view acquisition, but most of them optimize local probe behavior or predefined targets rather than sequentially selecting complementary views for comprehen-sive multi-view perception. 

Viewpoint Selection. Viewpoint selection, often studied as next-best-view planning or active observation, aims to select future views that improve scene understanding, reconstruction quality, or task performance. Isler et al. [14 ] formulated active 3D reconstruc-tion by maximizing volumetric information gain. Di et al. [ 6] learned viewpoint policies for active localization. Chen et al. [4] developed generative next-best-view modeling, while Feng et al. [ 9 ] and Xue 

et al. [ 29 ] explored neural view planning for active 3D reconstruc-tion. Hou et al. [ 13 ] further showed that multi-view recognition benefits from learning which views to acquire rather than aggregat-ing views exhaustively. Collectively, these works show that actively selecting views can substantially improve information efficiency compared with fixed or exhaustive observation. Compared with its broad use in general active vision, the viewpoint-selection perspective has been only sparsely explored in ultrasound-related settings. Existing efforts mainly recover target views from local image feedback [ 11 , 20 ], learn task-specific rewards for robotic sonography [ 17 ], impose safety-aware constraints during autonomous acquisition [ 7], or guide scanning with tissue-view maps for pre-defined structures [ 25 ]. While closely related, these methods more commonly optimize image quality, probe safety, or navigation to-ward predefined views or structures. Relatively few studies ex-plicitly formulate ultrasound scanning as a sequential viewpoint selection problem in which future probe views are chosen based on previously observed anatomy and accumulated spatial mem-ory. Our work follows this viewpoint-selection perspective and instantiates it as active probe exploration for ultrasound. 

## 3 Methodology 3.1 SonoSelect Framework 

We formulate active view exploration for ultrasound perception as a sequential decision-making problem under partial observability. The complete 3D anatomy is not directly accessible; the agent can only observe it through partial 2D ultrasound views. The objective is to learn an exploration policy 𝜋 𝜙 (𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 ) that maps the current state 

𝑠 𝑡 to continuous kinematic actions 𝑎 𝑡 , maximizing the cumulative coverage of the target anatomical structure within a fixed budget of 𝑇 steps. 

State. Because the number of acquired views grows with each step, directly conditioning the policy on the full observation history is impractical. We instead maintain a 3D probability map ˆ𝑉 𝑡 that fuses all past observations into a fixed-size voxel grid, serving as a spatial memory of the explored anatomy. At each step 𝑡 , the 2D SonoSelect: Efficient Ultrasound Perception via Active Probe Exploration a1 𝑠 1 a2 𝑠 2 a𝑡  𝑠 𝑡 

> Scan
> Result

…       

> 𝑝 1,𝑞 1
> ෠𝑉 1
> 𝑈 ⋅𝑈 ⋅𝑈 ⋅
> SS

…

# …  

> 𝑝 2,𝑞 2
> ෠𝑉 2
> 𝑝 t,𝑞 t
> ෠𝑉 t

Figure 2: Active probe exploration framework (SonoSelect) with 𝑇 scanning steps. Solid lines indicate the network forward pass and dashed lines indicate the agent-environment interaction. The approach starts from an initial probe pose, and the agent produces an action 𝑎 𝑡 from the current state 𝑠 𝑡 through the view selection module 𝑆 and the action refinement module, then executes 𝑎 𝑡 to acquire a new ultrasound view, which is fused into the probability map ˆ𝑉 𝑡 +1 via 𝑈 (·) . This process repeats for 𝑇 

steps, progressively building a dense reconstruction. 

ultrasound view 𝐼 𝑡 acquired at probe pose (p𝑡 , q𝑡 ) is fused into ˆ𝑉 𝑡 

via the volumetric fusion function 𝑈 (·) . Specifically, 𝑈 (·) projects the segmentation mask of 𝐼 𝑡 back into the voxel grid using the known probe pose and updates the occupancy probability of each intersected voxel via Bayesian fusion, so that repeated observations of the same region progressively reduce uncertainty. We formulate the state 𝑠 𝑡 as: 

𝑠 𝑡 = ( ˆ𝑉 𝑡 , p𝑡 , q𝑡 ), (1) where ˆ𝑉 𝑡 aggregates all views observed up to step 𝑡 into a spatial probability map in which each voxel stores the estimated probability of tissue occupancy. Since ˆ𝑉 𝑡 is defined over a fixed voxel grid, 𝑠 𝑡 

maintains the same dimensionality at every step. ˆ𝑉 0 is initialized to a uniform probability of 0.5 to represent maximum uncertainty. The state 𝑠 𝑡 captures the spatial structure observed so far, but does not indicate how much of the target anatomy has been covered. To quantify exploration progress, we define a coverage ratio: 

𝑐 𝑡 =

Í𝑣 ˆ𝑉 𝑡 (𝑣 ) · 𝑔 (𝑣 )

Í𝑣 𝑔 (𝑣 ) + 𝛿 , 𝑐 𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1], (2) where the summation runs over all voxels 𝑣 in the reconstruction volume, 𝑔 (𝑣 ) is the ground-truth binary mask of the target structure and 𝛿 is a small constant for numerical stability. Since 𝑐 𝑡 requires 

𝑔 (𝑣 ), it is available only during training. To leverage this privileged information without leaking it to the deployed policy, we follow the asymmetric actor-critic formulation [ 22 ]: the actor 𝜋 𝜙 (𝑎 𝑡 |𝑠 𝑡 )

observes only 𝑠 𝑡 , while the critic 𝑉 𝜓 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 ) additionally receives 𝑐 𝑡 ;at deployment, the critic is discarded. 

Action . For a given state 𝑠 𝑡 at time step 𝑡 ∈ { 1, . . . ,𝑇 }, the agent outputs a continuous 4D action 𝑎 𝑡 = (Δ𝑥, Δ𝑧, Δ𝜙, Δ𝜓 ), where Δ𝑥 

and Δ𝑧 are translational displacements along the x and z axes, and 

Δ𝜙 and Δ𝜓 are rotational increments for roll and yaw, respectively. The y-axis translation is omitted because the probe maintains sur-face contact throughout scanning. 

Transition . Upon executing action 𝑎 𝑡 , the probe pose is updated to (p𝑡 +1, q𝑡 +1) via the environment’s kinematic function. The envi-ronment then returns a new ultrasound view 𝐼 𝑡 +1, which is fused into the probability map to produce ˆ𝑉 𝑡 +1, and the state transitions to 𝑠 𝑡 +1 = ( ˆ𝑉 𝑡 +1, p𝑡 +1, q𝑡 +1). The scanning process terminates when the step budget 𝑇 is exhausted. 

Reward . We design a dense, multi-objective reward function: 

𝑟 𝑡 = 𝑤 𝑐𝑜𝑣 Δ𝑐 𝑡 + 𝑤 𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑜 Δ𝐻 𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑜 𝑡 − ℓ𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑡 . (3) The first term Δ𝑐 𝑡 measures the incremental coverage gain over the anatomical structures of interest, weighted by 𝑤 𝑐𝑜𝑣 , and provides the main learning signal. Since a single partial view may refine the reconstruction without producing measurable coverage gain, the second term Δ𝐻 𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑜 𝑡 , weighted by 𝑤 𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑜 , captures the reduction in volumetric Shannon entropy over the target region, providing a learning signal for these intermediate steps. Because the pol-icy maximizes the cumulative sum of all terms, entropy reduction alone cannot sustain high returns; the coverage term steers the policy toward diagnostically relevant regions rather than arbitrary high-uncertainty areas. Finally, to discourage large unnecessary movements that waste the limited step budget without acquiring new information, the path penalty is defined as 

ℓ𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑡 = 𝑤 𝑝𝑜𝑠 ∥Δp𝑡 ∥2 + 𝑤 𝑎𝑛𝑔 ∥Δ𝜽 𝑡 ∥2, (4) where Δp𝑡 and Δ𝜽 𝑡 denote the translational and rotational displace-ments between consecutive steps, respectively. 

## 3.2 Policy Network 

A flat continuous policy would need to simultaneously decide which region to visit and compute the kinematic actions to get there, yet once a target direction is determined, the remaining problem re-duces to local navigation. SonoSelect therefore decomposes the task into two coupled modules: a view selection module that discretizes the operational area into a finite set of candidate directions and selects where to explore next, and an action refinement module Zhang et al. 𝑄  𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑖  𝑧 𝑡   

> Q-
> network
> …
> (max)
> 𝐯 𝐭
> 𝐩 𝐨 𝐬
> 𝑓 𝑖
> …
> Δ𝑡 ~𝑁 𝜇 ,𝜎 2

action refinement 

view selection   

> policy network 𝜋 𝜙
> residual
> fusion

+                

> ෡Vt
> pt
> qt
> vt
> s𝑡 =෠𝑉 𝑡 𝐩 𝑡 𝐪 𝑡 s𝑡 +1=෠𝑉 𝑡 +1𝐩 𝑡 +1𝐪 𝑡 +1
> ෠𝑉 𝑡 𝐩 𝑡 𝐪 𝑡 probe move
> 𝑎 𝑡 =𝑎 𝑡
> pos ,𝑎 𝑡
> ang

Figure 3: Policy Network Architecture. The view selection module extracts sector features 𝑓 𝑖 from the reconstruction volume, computes Q-values 𝑄 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑖 ) for each sector, and converts the selected sector 𝑧 𝑡 into a positional guidance vector vpos  

> 𝑡

. The action refinement module takes 𝑠 𝑡 and vpos  

> 𝑡

as input and outputs a kinematic increment Δ𝑡 . The residual fusion module combines vpos 

> 𝑡

and the scaled increment ˆΔ𝑡 to produce the final action 𝑎 𝑡 .

that translates the selected direction into kinematic probe motion toward the chosen sector. Together, these two modules form the policy network that maps the current state 𝑠 𝑡 to the final action 𝑎 𝑡 ,corresponding to the module marked "S" in Fig. 2. We partition the operational area around the current probe po-sition into 𝑆 equiangular sectors. Each sector corresponds to a candidate direction the probe can explore next. To obtain a feature representation 𝑓 𝑖 for each sector, the reconstruction volume ˆ𝑉 𝑡 is first rearranged by treating elevation views as input channels and then processed by a shared 2D convolutional encoder. For each sector 𝑖 , a binary sector mask is applied to the encoded feature map, followed by parallel average and max pooling. The concatenated pooling result is then projected through a shared MLP to produce 

𝑓 𝑖 .The sector features {𝑓 𝑖 }𝑆 𝑖 =1 are each passed through a shared Q-network to produce action values {𝑄 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑖 )} 𝑆 𝑖 =1, where 𝑄 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑖 )

estimates the expected cumulative reward for navigating toward sector 𝑧 𝑖 . The Q-network shares parameters across all sectors, so it generalizes across candidate directions rather than learning sepa-rate value estimates for each. During training, the sector is chosen via an 𝜖 -greedy strategy to balance exploration and exploitation; at deployment, the sector with the highest Q-value is selected. The geometric center of the selected sector 𝑧 𝑡 is converted into a posi-tional target vector vpos  

> 𝑡

∈ R2 in the probe’s local coordinate frame, representing the translational direction toward the selected sector. This vector serves as the guidance signal for the downstream action refinement module. The action refinement module translates the selected sector into kinematic actions. It is implemented as a PPO-based actor-critic ar-chitecture. The actor takes as input the current state 𝑠 𝑡 concatenated with the sector guidance vector vpos  

> 𝑡

, and outputs a local kinematic increment Δ𝑡 = [Δpos  

> 𝑡

, Δang  

> 𝑡

] ∈ R4. A residual scaling factor 𝛼 is applied to obtain the scaled increment ˆΔ𝑡 = 𝛼 Δ𝑡 . The final action 𝑎 𝑡 

fuses the sector-derived target with this scaled increment through a residual connection: 

𝑎 pos  

> 𝑡

= 𝛽 𝑡 vpos  

> 𝑡

+ ( 1 − 𝛽 𝑡 ) ˆΔpos  

> 𝑡

, 𝑎 ang  

> 𝑡

= ˆΔang  

> 𝑡

, (5) where 𝛽 𝑡 linearly anneals from an initial value 𝛽 0 to a final value 𝛽 𝑓 

over training. In early training, 𝛽 𝑡 is large so that the translational component is dominated by the sector guidance vpos  

> 𝑡

, providing a stable learning signal before the policy has converged. As training progresses, 𝛽 𝑡 decreases and the policy’s own output ˆΔpos  

> 𝑡

gradu-ally takes over, allowing the agent to refine the coarse sector-level direction into precise kinematic adjustments. The angular compo-nent 𝑎 ang  

> 𝑡

is determined entirely by the policy, as the view selection module provides only translational guidance. The critic estimates the state value 𝑉 𝜓 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 ) using the state (Eq. (1)) augmented with the coverage ratio (Eq. (2)). 

## 3.3 Training Scheme 

The view selection module and the action refinement module ad-dress different aspects of the problem and require different optimiza-tion objectives, but they share the same trajectory data. We employ a rollout-based sequential updating approach to jointly train the action refinement module (via PPO [ 24 ]) and the view selection module (via Q-learning). Within each iteration, both modules are SonoSelect: Efficient Ultrasound Perception via Active Probe Exploration 

updated from the same collected rollouts, ensuring consistent learn-ing signals across the two decision levels. The action refinement module is optimized using the standard PPO objective with Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [ 23 ]. The actor outputs kinematic increments Δ𝑡 and is updated via clipped surrogate objectives, while the critic estimates 𝑉 𝜓 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 )

and provides the baseline for advantage computation. For the view selection module, we train the sector Q-network using Monte Carlo rollout returns as regression targets. The action-value function 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 ) estimates the expected discounted return after selecting sector 𝑧 𝑡 at state 𝑠 𝑡 :

𝑄 𝜃 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 ) = E

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝜏 =𝑡

𝛾 𝜏 −𝑡 𝑟 𝜏 

!

, (6) where E(·) denotes the expectation and 𝛾 ∈ [ 0, 1] is the discount factor. Although both modules share the same reward signal, they require different value representations. The PPO critic learns a state value 𝑉 𝜓 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 ) used to compute advantages for the action refinement module, while the view selection module learns action-conditional values 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑖 ) that compare the expected return across candidate sectors. This difference motivates maintaining separate value functions despite the shared reward. The return from the collected rollouts serves as the supervision target for the Q-network: 

𝑦 𝑡 =

(

𝑟 𝑡 + 𝛾 (1 − 𝑑 𝑡 )𝑦 𝑡 +1, if 𝑡 < 𝑇 𝑟 𝑇 , otherwise , (7) where 𝑑 𝑡 is the termination mask. The Q-network is then optimized using the 𝐿 2 distance loss: 

L𝑄 = 𝜆 𝑄 

1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

MSE (𝑄 𝜃 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 ), 𝑦 𝑡 ), (8) where 𝜆 𝑄 controls the loss weight. In joint training, the two ob-jectives are optimized in separate backward passes within each iteration. First, the PPO objective LPPO updates the action refine-ment module and the critic. Then, in a separate backward pass, the Q-learning loss L𝑄 updates the view selection module, including the Q-network and its associated feature encoder. This sequential scheme prevents gradient interference between the two objectives. The complete procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

## 4 Experiment 

We evaluate our approach in two stages. Sec. 4.1 studies multi-view classification in a simplified discrete setting, and Sec. 4.2 evaluates SonoSelect on a continuous kidney cyst detection task. 

## 4.1 Preliminary: Multi-view Classification 

Before evaluating the full scanning pipeline, we first ask a simpler question: given a set of candidate viewpoints, can an adaptive se-lection policy identify the few informative views for each instance? To answer this, we use a simplified setting where the probe can access any candidate viewpoint without movement cost. As the adaptive selection method, we adopt MVSelect [ 13 ], which sequen-tially chooses the next view conditioned on previously acquired observations. This setup lets us test whether observation-driven 

Algorithm 1 Training Pipeline of SonoSelect  

> 1:

Input : Env E, budget 𝑇 , exploration rate 𝜖 , scaling factor 𝛼 , annealing weight 𝛽 𝑡 , Q-loss weight 𝜆 𝑄 . 

> 2:

Initialize : Q-network 𝑄 𝜃 , actor 𝜋 𝜙 , critic 𝑉 𝜓 . 

> 3:

for each training iteration do  

> 4:

Initialize rollout buffers BPPO , B𝑄 ← ∅  

> 5:

Reset environment: 𝑠 1 ← E .reset ()  

> 6:

for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do  

> 7:

Extract sector features { 𝑓 𝑖 }𝑆 𝑖 =1 from ˆ𝑉 𝑡 in state 𝑠 𝑡 (Eq. (1))  

> 8:

Compute Q-values {𝑄 𝜃 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑖 ) } 𝑆 𝑖 =1 for all sectors  

> 9:

Select sector via 𝜖 -greedy: with probability 𝜖 sample 𝑧 𝑡 uniformly from {𝑧 1, . . . , 𝑧 𝑆 }, otherwise 𝑧 𝑡 = arg max 𝑧 𝑖 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑖 ) 

> 10:

Compute guidance vpos  

> 𝑡

← GeometricCenter (𝑧 𝑡 ) 

> 11:

Sample Δ𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 𝜙 (· | 𝑠 𝑡 , vpos  

> 𝑡

); scale ˆΔ𝑡 ← 𝛼 Δ𝑡  

> 12:

Fuse action: 𝑎 pos  

> 𝑡

← 𝛽 𝑡 vpos  

> 𝑡

+ ( 1−𝛽 𝑡 ) ˆΔpos  

> 𝑡

, 𝑎 ang  

> 𝑡

← ˆΔang  

> 𝑡

(Eq. (5))  

> 13:

Execute 𝑎 𝑡 in E; observe 𝑠 𝑡 +1, 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑑 𝑡  

> 14:

Update probe pose: (p𝑡 +1, q𝑡 +1 ) 

> 15:

Store (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 , 𝑎 𝑡 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 +1, 𝑐 𝑡 +1, 𝑑 𝑡 ) in BPPO , where 𝑐 𝑡 is computed via Eq. (2)  

> 16:

Store (𝑠 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑠 𝑡 +1, 𝑑 𝑡 ) in B𝑄  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

Compute GAE advantages from BPPO ; update 𝜋 𝜙 , 𝑉 𝜓 via LPPO  

> 19:

Compute discounted returns {𝑦 𝑡 }𝑇 𝑡 =1 from B𝑄 via Eq. (7)  

> 20:

Update Q-network 𝑄 𝜃 and shared encoder via Eq. (8)  

> 21:

end for 

view selection is beneficial before introducing continuous probe control. 

Datasets. We construct two custom multi-view ultrasound datasets, both adopting a strict 80%/20% train-test split and extracting 120 ×

120 2D ultrasound views under two distinct viewpoint configura-tions (12-view and 20-view configurations). 

• Geometry: this synthetic dataset comprises 10 distinct cat-egories (sphere, ellipsoid, cube, cuboid, cylinder, capsule, cone, torus, octahedron, and cross), with 150 unique in-stances per category. 

• Organ: to move closer to clinical realism, we introduce a more challenging dataset comprising real human anatomi-cal structures sourced from the publicly available TotalSeg-mentator dataset [ 27 ]. It contains 6 distinct categories: left kidney, liver, pancreas, spleen, aorta, and stomach, with 100 unique patient instances per category. 

Task Network. For both datasets, we employ a ResNet-18 [ 12 ]backbone combined with a max-pooling aggregation module. The network is trained offline on complete multi-view sequences so that the learned representations are not biased toward any particular view subset. 

Quantitative Results. The classification performances on both datasets are summarized in Table 1. We compare five selection strategies: (1) dataset-level oracle , which uses the same fixed pair of views that achieves the highest average accuracy across all instances in the training set; (2) instance-level oracle , which selects the optimal pair for each test instance by exhaustive search; (3) random selection ,which samples two views uniformly; (4) validation best policy , which selects the fixed pair that achieves the highest accuracy on the validation set; and (5) MVSelect [ 13 ], which sequentially selects views conditioned on previous observations. Zhang et al.                                                        

> view selection Geometry Organ 12 views 20 views 12 views 20 views N/A: all 𝑁 views 84.02 92.96 92.50 91.73 dataset-lvl oracle 79.07 ±0.71 83.42 ±2.23 92.75 ±0.64 90.13 ±1.98 instance-lvl oracle 93.80 ±0.47 99.23 ±0.61 98.04 ±0.61 99.32 ±1.06 random selection 74.61 ±2.32 68.71 ±8.34 87.44 ±4.17 73.91 ±11.58 validation best policy 71.57 ±2.46 70.87 ±5.60 88.51 ±1.61 83.73 ±4.06 MVSelect [13] 79.11 ±1.33 89.59 ±1.61 96.23 ±1.62 97.00 ±1.04

Table 1: Classification accuracy (%) on Geometry and Organ. Each adaptive or fixed policy selects two views per instance from the candidate set. 

We first note that using all 𝑁 views does not yield the highest accuracy. The instance-level oracle, which selects the best two views per instance via exhaustive search, substantially surpasses the all-view baseline on both datasets. This suggests that not all views contribute positively to the final prediction. However, the dataset-level oracle, which fixes the same two views across all instances, performs considerably worse than the instance-level oracle. This gap confirms that the most informative views vary across instances. Random selection performs the worst overall, with high variance reflecting the inconsistency of uninformed view choices. MVSelect, which selects views conditioned on each instance’s observations, approaches the instance-level oracle on both datasets. This confirms that an adaptive policy can recover near-optimal view combinations without exhaustive search. Fig. 4 visualizes the selected viewpoints for representative instances, showing that the policy chooses different orientations for different objects and anatomies. Together, these results support the two properties that motivate SonoSelect: (1) a small number of well-chosen views can match or exceed the performance of exhaustive acquisition, and (2) the optimal views are instance-dependent and vary across patient anatomies. Building on these findings, SonoSelect further addresses how to acquire such informative views by adaptively guiding probe movement based on a 3D spatial memory of the observed anatomy. The following section evaluates SonoSelect on a kidney cyst detec-tion task, where the agent guides probe movement to detect target pathology within a limited scanning budget. 

## 4.2 Kidney Cyst Detection 

The preliminary study confirms that a small number of adaptively chosen views can match or exceed exhaustive acquisition, and that the optimal views vary across instances. Building on this finding, we now evaluate whether SonoSelect can achieve high diagnostic coverage with fewer, adaptively selected views when the probe moves sequentially along the body surface, where each movement carries a scanning cost and the agent receives only partial observa-tions of the underlying anatomy. We test on a kidney cyst detection task, which requires the agent to balance broad organ coverage with precise localization of small pathological targets, and evaluate generalization to unseen patient anatomies. 

Experimental Setup. The primary task requires the agent to dynamically scan the left kidney and identify renal cysts. We utilize 3D clinical CT volumes from the TotalSegmentator dataset [ 27 ], 

Figure 4: Qualitative results of the discrete view selection policy. We visualize the selected viewpoints for both the Geometry (top) and Organ (bottom) datasets. 

selecting volumes that contain annotated kidney and cyst segmen-tations. The dataset is split at the patient level into a training set of seen anatomies used for policy learning and a test set of entirely unseen patient anatomies that do not appear during training. 

Implementation details. We train all models using PPO with 64 parallel environments for a total of 500K environment steps. We use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 3 × 10 −4, adjusted by a KL-adaptive scheduler. The discount factor is 𝛾 = 0.97 with GAE parameter 𝜆 = 0.95 . For the auxiliary Q-network, we use a lower learning rate of 1×10 −4 and schedule its loss weight 𝜆 𝑄 from 0.05 to 0.02 over 150K steps to gradually reduce its influence as the policy matures. A target network updated via Polyak averaging ( 𝜏 = 0.005 )is employed to provide stable regression targets for Q-value training. The residual guidance coefficient 𝛽 𝑡 is linearly annealed from 1.0 to 0.05 over 300K steps, allowing the policy to transition from heuristic-guided exploration to autonomous scanning. The policy and value networks share a lightweight 2D CNN encoder. The encoder receives the reconstructed ultrasound volume by stacking depth slices along the channel dimension, converting the 3D input into a multi-channel 2D representation. This design avoids the computational overhead of 3D convolutions while preserving depth information through channel-wise encoding. Each episode has a step budget of 𝑇 = 600 . All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090D GPU. 

Baselines. In this fully continuous setting, we benchmark SonoS-elect against baselines representing alternative exploration strate-gies. Random applies uniformly sampled kinematic actions at each step, providing a lower bound on diagnostic yield without any learned or heuristic guidance. PPO [24 ] trains a single continuous control policy that directly maps observations to probe actions, testing whether end-to-end reinforcement learning can implicitly learn effective exploration without explicit spatial planning. VIG 

(Volumetric Information Gain) [ 14 ] represents classical Next-Best-View planning driven by entropy maximization, testing whether uncertainty reduction alone provides sufficient guidance for di-agnostic exploration. RND [ 3] provides a state-visitation driven exploration bonus, testing whether encouraging novel state visits improves coverage without task-specific guidance. 

Quantitative Results. Section 4.2 presents scanning perfor-mance on seen and unseen patient anatomies. SonoSelect: Efficient Ultrasound Perception via Active Probe Exploration                                                                                                                                   

> Method Sectors Seen Patient Unseen Patient Kidney (%) ↑Cyst (%) ↑Dice (%) ↑IoU (%) ↑Trans.(voxels) ↓Rot.( ◦)↓Kidney (%) ↑Cyst (%) ↑Dice (%) ↑IoU (%) ↑Trans.(voxels) ↓Rot.( ◦)↓
> Random -13.79 8.38 22.82 14.13 925.81 2623.35 23.41 1.88 37.41 24.50 937.55 2624.38 PPO -60.46 44.94 69.76 53.69 427.52 294.24 33.14 12.10 47.97 34.62 376.92 247.93 RND -64.99 45.53 72.59 57.08 549.41 318.89 48.91 23.41 64.94 49.33 540.09 272.15 VIG -56.95 40.35 63.88 50.36 484.74 350.06 48.62 23.12 64.84 49.03 463.56 417.47
> SonoSelect 456.52 41.50 66.66 50.40 398.51 258.11 23.06 3.67 37.05 24.24 353.37 201.96
> SonoSelect 862.39 47.13 71.52 55.93 570.16 186.57 50.87 30.91 67.53 51.50 561.80 198.36 SonoSelect 16 67.55 48.37 73.88 58.62 423.40 311.65 54.56 27.13 70.76 54.78 446.98 311.12
> SonoSelect 32 65.07 45.67 72.70 57.20 532.87 258.49 52.14 27.90 66.97 51.16 574.52 213.78

Table 2: Quantitative comparison of active scanning performance. SonoSelect shows smaller performance degradation on unseen patient anatomies compared to other learned baselines. 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 

> Step
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> Cyst Coverage  PPO
> RND
> SonoSelect
> VIG
> Random

Figure 5: Cyst coverage over scanning steps on unseen anatomies. 200 300 400 500 600 

> Trajectory Length (voxels)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> Cyst Coverage (%)
> SonoSelect
> PPO

Figure 6: Episode-level cyst coverage vs. trajectory length on unseen anatomies. Each point represents one episode. 0 10 20 30 40 50 

> Cyst Coverage (%)
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> Density
> SonoSelect
> PPO

Figure 7: Distribution of per-episode cyst coverage on unseen anatomies. 

On seen anatomies, SonoSelect (16 sectors) achieves the highest scores across all four diagnostic metrics. The differences among learned methods remain moderate on seen anatomies, since all methods have access to the same training distribution. The more informative comparison is therefore on unseen anatomies, where the methods can no longer rely on patterns encountered during training. All methods degrade on unseen anatomies, but the degree of degradation differs. PPO exhibits the largest drop, with kidney cov-erage falling from 60.46% to 33.14% and cyst coverage from 44.94% to 12.10%, suggesting that its policy overfits to training-specific spa-tial patterns. RND and VIG show better retention than PPO, with cyst coverage reaching 23.41% and 23.12% respectively on unseen data. RND encourages visiting novel states and VIG maximizes observation entropy, both of which provide some robustness to anatomy changes. However, both methods still fall behind SonoSe-lect on all four diagnostic metrics on unseen data. SonoSelect (16 sectors) achieves the highest scores and shows the smallest perfor-mance gap between seen and unseen anatomies, suggesting that the spatial memory provides a more transferable basis for probe guidance than novelty or entropy driven exploration alone. We also report translation and rotation errors in Section 4.2. These met-rics reflect cumulative probe displacement during scanning rather than diagnostic quality. Among the learned methods, translation and rotation errors do not show a consistent ranking, as different exploration strategies produce trajectories of varying lengths and orientations. SonoSelect (16 sectors) achieves moderate translation and rotation values while obtaining the highest diagnostic coverage, indicating that its coverage advantage comes from more targeted probe movement rather than simply longer trajectories. 

Effect of Sector Granularity. The number of sectors controls the granularity of the routing decision (Section 4.2). With only 4 sectors, the routing module partitions the search space too coarsely, and performance on unseen anatomies drops close to the random baseline. Increasing to 8 sectors provides sufficient directional res-olution for the routing policy to generalize, yielding a substantial improvement on unseen data. Performance peaks at 16 sectors, where the routing granularity balances expressiveness against the difficulty of learning a reliable policy from limited training episodes. At 32 sectors, performance slightly decreases, indicating that finer partitioning introduces more choices than the policy can reliably distinguish given the available training data. 

Scanning Efficiency. Fig. 5 compares how efficiently each method converts scanning steps into diagnostic coverage. In the initial phase, RND achieves the fastest coverage growth, followed by VIG and SonoSelect. However, after approximately 150 steps, SonoS-elect’s growth rate accelerates and surpasses both RND and VIG, with the gap continuing to widen in later stages. By 600 steps, SonoSelect achieves 35% cyst coverage, compared to 23% for RND and 23% for VIG. PPO’s curve flattens early and achieves only 12% cyst coverage by 600 steps, the lowest among all learning-based methods. 

Episode-level Analysis. The scatter plot in Fig. 6 examines this efficiency at the episode level. PPO clusters in the bottom-left quad-rant, indicating frequent near-zero coverage episodes with short, spatially confined trajectories; on unseen anatomies, the agent fre-quently remains confined to local regions. SonoSelect occupies Zhang et al. (a) PPO  (b) SonoSelect     

> 13.5% 16.1% 19.6% 39.5% 33.6% 25.9%

Figure 8: Scanning trajectories on unseen data. Red/purple: on/off-target; percentages: effective scanning ratio. 

the upper-right quadrant, where longer trajectories correspond to higher diagnostic coverage. The per-episode distribution in Fig. 7 further illustrates this contrast: PPO’s cyst coverage concentrates near zero, while SonoSelect’s distribution shifts toward higher val-ues. 

Qualitative Results. Representative trajectories in Fig. 8 show the same pattern spatially. PPO produces circular movements far from the kidney, with effective scanning ratios of 13.5%-19.6%, in-dicating that the probe spends most of its budget on non-target regions. SonoSelect follows the kidney contours with substantially higher ratios, reflecting that the sector routing module directs the probe toward diagnostically relevant areas. Across all three analy-ses, the results indicate that SonoSelect achieves higher coverage not by scanning longer, but by allocating its scanning budget more effectively, reducing redundant acquisition while increasing the likelihood of reaching diagnostically relevant viewpoints. 

## 4.3 Ablation Studies 

To validate the core architectural designs of SonoSelect, we conduct ablation experiments on the kidney cyst detection task using un-seen patient data. We isolate three components: the learned routing policy, the per-sector feature representation, and the residual con-trol module. Each ablation removes one component while keeping the rest unchanged. The quantitative comparisons are summarized in Table 3. 

Effect of Learned Routing. We first evaluate the high-level decision maker by replacing the learned routing policy with ran-dom view selection. Without a task-driven geometric prior, the continuous policy receives arbitrary directional targets, leading to uncoordinated probe movement. As shown in Table 3, this variant shows a notable drop in cyst coverage, with the score falling by roughly half, confirming that the learned routing policy is neces-sary to constrain the search space and direct the continuous policy toward diagnostically relevant regions. Without learned routing, the continuous policy can execute local movements but lacks direc-tional guidance toward diagnostically relevant regions. 

Necessity of Explicit Sector Features. The w/o Sector Features variant replaces the per-sector feature vectors with uniform values, making all sectors appear identical to the Q-network. Although the Q-network still receives the global observation 𝑠 𝑡 , it cannot distin-guish sectors based on their spatial content in the reconstruction                            

> Method Kidney Cyst Dice IoU Random Routing 47.85 13.77 62.80 45.53 w/o Sector Features 45.32 18.39 61.35 45.24 w/o Residual Control 49.94 16.18 59.23 44.92 Fixed 𝛽 =1.049.41 27.60 67.04 50.45
> SonoSelect 54.56 27.13 70.76 54.78

Table 3: Ablation study of SonoSelect components on unseen anatomies. 

volume. As a result, the Q-network selects sectors without consider-ing what each region contains, leading to reduced coverage for both kidney and cyst targets. This drop confirms that the Q-network relies on per-sector spatial features to make informed routing deci-sions. Without per-sector features, the Q-network cannot leverage the spatial memory to differentiate among candidate sectors. 

Role of Residual Control. The w/o Residual Control variant re-moves the low-level kinematic adjustments and relies solely on the sector-level waypoints for probe guidance. This variant achieves the lowest Dice and IoU among all configurations, while its kidney coverage remains comparable to the other ablated variants. This asymmetry indicates that sector-level routing provides sufficient guidance for reaching the target region, but localizing small struc-tures such as cysts requires the finer probe adjustments that the residual control module provides. 

Effect of Guidance Annealing. In the full model, the guidance coefficient 𝛽 𝑡 is linearly annealed from 1.0 to 0.05 during training, gradually shifting translational control from the sector guidance to the policy’s own output. The Fixed 𝛽 = 1.0 variant keeps 𝛽 𝑡 

at 1.0 throughout training and deployment. As shown in Table 3, this variant achieves comparable cyst coverage to the full model, but kidney coverage and reconstruction quality both decline. This suggests that the annealing schedule allows the policy to learn fine-grained translational adjustments beyond the sector center, which contributes to more complete coverage of the kidney surface. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We propose SonoSelect, an active probe exploration framework for robotic ultrasound that selects informative viewpoints without exhaustive scanning or predefined trajectories. By bridging discrete high-level regional routing with continuous low-level kinematic control, SonoSelect learns to resolve anatomical ambiguities and achieves robust generalization to unseen anatomies where standard reinforcement learning approaches show substantial performance degradation. This approach represents a step toward autonomous robotic ultrasound deployment in clinical workflows. While the cur-rent evaluation is conducted in simulation, the hierarchical formu-lation of coupling discrete region selection with continuous probe control provides a principled way to handle the view-dependent nature of ultrasound imaging. This work suggests that structured, observation-driven exploration can serve as an effective mecha-nism for multi-view ultrasound perception, reducing the number of views needed for accurate diagnosis while maintaining robust coverage across diverse patient anatomies. SonoSelect: Efficient Ultrasound Perception via Active Probe Exploration 

## References 

[1] Yunke Ao, Masoud Moghani, Mayank Mittal, Manish Prajapat, Luohong Wu, Frederic Giraud, Fabio Carrillo, Andreas Krause, and Philipp Fürnstahl. 2025. Sonogym: High performance simulation for challenging surgical tasks with robotic ultrasound. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01152 (2025). [2] Yuan Bi, Zhongliang Jiang, Felix Duelmer, Dianye Huang, and Nassir Navab. 2024. Machine learning in robotic ultrasound imaging: Challenges and perspectives. 

Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems 7 (2024). [3] Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. 2018. Exploration by random network distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894 (2018). [4] Xiao Chen, Quanyi Li, Tai Wang, Tianfan Xue, and Jiangmiao Pang. 2024. Gennbv: Generalizable next-best-view policy for active 3d reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 16436– 16445. [5] Yin Dai, Yifan Gao, and Fayu Liu. 2021. Transmed: Transformers advance multi-modal medical image classification. Diagnostics 11, 8 (2021), 1384. [6] Luca Di Giammarino, Boyang Sun, Giorgio Grisetti, Marc Pollefeys, Hermann Blum, and Daniel Barath. 2024. Learning where to look: Self-supervised view-point selection for active localization using geometrical information. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 188–205. [7] Anqing Duan, Chenguang Yang, Jingyuan Zhao, Shengzeng Huo, Peng Zhou, Wanyu Ma, Yongping Zheng, and David Navarro-Alarcon. 2024. Safe learning by constraint-aware policy optimization for robotic ultrasound imaging. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 22 (2024), 2349–2360. [8] Hanae Elmekki, Saidul Islam, Ahmed Alagha, Hani Sami, Amanda Spilkin, Ehsan Zakeri, Antonela Mariel Zanuttini, Jamal Bentahar, Lyes Kadem, Wen-Fang Xie, et al . 2025. Comprehensive review of reinforcement learning for medical ultrasound imaging. Artificial Intelligence Review 58, 9 (2025), 284. [9] Ziyue Feng, Huangying Zhan, Zheng Chen, Qingan Yan, Xiangyu Xu, Changjiang Cai, Bing Li, Qilun Zhu, and Yi Xu. 2024. Naruto: Neural active reconstruction from uncertain target observations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 21572–21583. [10] Xiaoqing Guo, Mohammad Alsharid, He Zhao, Yipei Wang, Jayne Lander, Aris T Papageorghiou, and J Alison Noble. 2026. A visually grounded language model for fetal ultrasound understanding. Nature Biomedical Engineering (2026), 1–17. [11] Hannes Hase, Mohammad Farid Azampour, Maria Tirindelli, Magdalini Paschali, Walter Simson, Emad Fatemizadeh, and Nassir Navab. 2020. Ultrasound-guided robotic navigation with deep reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 5534–5541. [12] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 770–778. [13] Yunzhong Hou, Stephen Gould, and Liang Zheng. 2024. Learning to select views for efficient multi-view understanding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 20135–20144. [14] Stefan Isler, Reza Sabzevari, Jeffrey Delmerico, and Davide Scaramuzza. 2016. An information gain formulation for active volumetric 3D reconstruction. In 2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 3477–3484. [15] Haojun Jiang, Andrew Zhao, Qian Yang, Xiangjie Yan, Teng Wang, Yulin Wang, Ning Jia, Jiangshan Wang, Guokun Wu, Yang Yue, et al . 2025. Towards expert-level autonomous carotid ultrasonography with large-scale learning-based robotic system. Nature Communications 16, 1 (2025), 7893. [16] Yuncheng Jiang, Chun-Mei Feng, Jinke Ren, Jun Wei, Zixun Zhang, Yiwen Hu, Yunbi Liu, Rui Sun, Xuemei Tang, Juan Du, et al . 2025. From pretraining to privacy: federated ultrasound foundation model with self-supervised learning. 

npj Digital Medicine 8, 1 (2025), 714. [17] Zhongliang Jiang, Yuan Bi, Mingchuan Zhou, Ying Hu, Michael Burke, and Nassir Navab. 2024. Intelligent robotic sonographer: Mutual information-based disentangled reward learning from few demonstrations. The International Journal of Robotics Research 43, 7 (2024), 981–1002. [18] Zhongliang Jiang, Septimiu E Salcudean, and Nassir Navab. 2023. Robotic ultra-sound imaging: State-of-the-art and future perspectives. Medical image analysis 

89 (2023), 102878. [19] Liren Jin, Xieyuanli Chen, Julius Rückin, and Marija Popović. 2023. Neu-nbv: Next best view planning using uncertainty estimation in image-based neural rendering. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 11305–11312. [20] Qianhui Men, Clare Teng, Lior Drukker, Aris T Papageorghiou, and J Alison Noble. 2023. Gaze-probe joint guidance with multi-task learning in obstetric ultrasound scanning. Medical image analysis 90 (2023), 102981. [21] Khushboo Munir, Abdullah F Al-Battal, Ammar Al-Sheghri, Harald Becher, Michelle Noga, and Kumaradevan Punithakumar. 2025. A survey of autonomous robotic ultrasound scanning systems. IEEE Access (2025). [22] Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. 2017. Asymmetric actor critic for image-based robot learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06542 (2017). [23] John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. 2015. High-dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estima-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 (2015). [24] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 

(2017). [25] Kang Su, Guanglong Du, Xueqian Wang, and Quanlong Guan. 2025. Tissue-view Map for Robotic Carotid Artery Ultrasound Scanning using Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (2025). [26] Yordanka Velikova, Mohammad Farid Azampour, Walter Simson, Vanessa Gon-zalez Duque, and Nassir Navab. 2023. Lotus: learning to optimize task-based us representations. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention . Springer, 435–445. [27] Jakob Wasserthal, Hanns-Christian Breit, Manfred T Meyer, Maurice Pradella, Daniel Hinck, Alexander W Sauter, Tobias Heye, Daniel T Boll, Joshy Cyriac, Shan Yang, et al . 2023. TotalSegmentator: robust segmentation of 104 anatomic structures in CT images. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence 5, 5 (2023), e230024. [28] Alistair Weld, Luke Dixon, Michael Dyck, Giulio Anichini, Alex Ranne, Sophie Camp, and Stamatia Giannarou. 2025. Identifying visible tissue in intraoperative ultrasound: a method and application. International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery 20, 10 (2025), 2107–2117. [29] Shangjie Xue, Jesse Dill, Pranay Mathur, Frank Dellaert, Panagiotis Tsiotra, and Danfei Xu. 2024. Neural visibility field for uncertainty-driven active mapping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition . 18122–18132.