Title: Improving Human Image Animation via Semantic Representation Alignment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.10523v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 03:22:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Improving Human Image Animation via Semantic Representation Alignment 

# Chang Liu 1, Mengting Chen 2, Yixuan Huang, Haoning Wu 1,Chen Ju 2, Shuai Xiao 2, Jinsong Lan 2, Yanfeng Wang 11School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 

> 2

# Alibaba Group, China 

# Abstract 

The field of image-to-video generation has made remark-able progress. However, challenges such as human limb twisting and facial distortion persist, especially when gen-erating long videos or modeling intensive motions. Existing human image animation works address these issues by in-corporating human-specific semantic representations, ( e.g. ,dense poses or ID embeddings) as additional conditions. However, conditioning on these representations could de-crease the generation flexibility. Moreover, their reliance on RGB pixel supervision also lacks emphasis on learning necessary 3D geometric relationships and temporal coher-ence. In contrast, we introduce a novel approach named 

SemanticREPA that leverages these semantic representa-tions as supervision signals through representation align-ment. Specifically, we begin by training a structure align-ment module that aligns the structure representations ob-tained from video latents with video depth estimation fea-tures. We then fix the pretrained module, and utilize it to provide additional supervision on the structure representa-tions of the diffusion models, achieving structure rectifica-tion to generate coherent and stable human structures. Si-multaneously, we develop an ID alignment module to align the ID representations of the generated videos to face recog-nition features. We further propose to use the predicted structure representations to refine identity restoration in rel-evant regions. With structure and ID alignment, our method demonstrates superior quality on extended character mo-tions and enhanced character consistency. 

# 1. Introduction 

In recent years, diffusion models [21, 52] have emerged as the leading approach in image generation. Models such as Stable Diffusion [14, 49], DALL-E [4, 46, 47], and Imagen [1, 16, 50] have achieved remarkable re-sults. With the advent of scalable diffusion transformer architectures [41] and large-scale datasets [9, 35], dif-fusion models have extended their success from image generation to the realm of video generation, for exam-ple, MovieGen [43], CogVideoX [66] and Open-Sora [72], along with proprietary commercial models like OpenAI Sora [38] and Kling [28]. Utilizing the latest models, users can now rapidly generate high-quality videos with hundreds of frames guided by various conditioning inputs. Human image animation, as a specialized adaptation of image-to-video generation, involves generating videos of a single person’s motion from an image featuring only one individual, guided by text or other conditions. Although most recent works emphasize incorporating additional mo-tion controls in the animation process, such as pose guid-ance [24, 64, 70, 73], flow guidance [8, 34, 37, 51], and camera trajectory guidance [30, 60], they still rely on RGB pixel-level supervision and suffer from issues such as limb twisting and facial distortion. This severely undermines human structure stability and character consistency, partic-ularly when generating long videos with extensive move-ments. Consequently, improving the backbone of image-to-video generative models for human image animation re-mains a challenging, yet highly valuable problem. In this paper, we consider to leverage semantic repre-sentation alignment as additional supervision, thereby en-hancing stability and consistency in image-to-video gener-ation. To mitigate limb distortion, we propose aligning the structure representations of video latents to video depth es-timation features [7], while for facial distortion, we con-sider aligning the ID representations to face recognition fea-tures [13, 40]. At training time, our method first trains the alignment modules for structure rectification and ID restoration, respectively, predicting the corresponding se-mantic representations from compressed VAE [27] latents. Next, we freeze the alignment modules and further fine-tune the diffusion transformer backbone. Consequently, the image-to-video backbone achieves strong understand-ing for 3D human motion and temporal identity consis-tency, enabling the generation of higher-quality human mo-tion videos. As shown in Figure 1, our method could gener-ate long videos with stable human structures and consistent identities, avoiding facial distortion and limb twisting. 1           

> arXiv:2605.10523v1 [cs.CV] 11 May 2026 Reference Image Existing Issue 1: Facial Distortion Reference Image Existing Issue 2: Limb Twisting
> Reference Image Our Method Generated Video Figure 1. In human image animation task, most existing image-to-video models exhibit issues like human limb twisting and facial distortion
> in generated videos. Our SemanticREPA employs semantic representation alignment as additional supervision during fine-tuning, allowing the generation of character motion videos with stable human structures and consistent identities.

To summarize, we make the following contributions in this paper: (i) We propose a solution SemanticREPA to limb twisting and facial distortion issues in diffusion-based hu-man image animation models by leveraging semantic rep-resentation alignment; (ii) We develop two alignment mod-ules that predict corresponding semantic representations di-rectly from video latents through knowledge distillation, which enables to leverage semantic representations as su-pervisions instead of conditions; (iii) Quantitative and qual-itative evaluations confirm the effectiveness of our method, demonstrating its ability to generate long character motion videos with improved structure stability and character con-sistency. 

# 2. Related Works 

2.1. Diffusion-based Video Generation 

With the tremendous progress of diffusion models in im-age generation [14, 49], recent research has increasingly focused on developing diffusion-based video generation models. Early works [6, 15, 17, 56] incorporate decou-pled spatial and temporal layers based on pretrained Sta-ble Diffusion text-to-image models. Stable Video Diffu-sion [5] advances further by introducing the first open-source image-to-video model, capable of generating videos up to 25 frames long. Some studies [3, 58, 69] also ex-plore using cascaded latent diffusion models to enhance per-formance. With the introduction of the scalable DiT [41] architecture, recent works [2, 22, 33, 72] has increas-ingly favored transformer-based architectures, as their pa-rameter scaling better accommodates the growing size of video datasets [9, 35]. Models such as CogVideoX [66], MovieGen [43], and Kling [28] can generate tens to hun-dreds of video frames in a single run, guided by text or image prompts. Our work aims to optimize the image-to-video backbone in the human portrait domain, addressing issues such as facial distortion and limb artifacts. 

2.2. Diffusion-based Human Image Animation 

Human image animation requires models to generate videos of a single given character’s movements, guided by image prompts and other conditions like text, denoting an adap-tation of the image-to-video task in the human portrait do-main. Given its substantial application potential and com-mercial value, this task has attracted considerable research attention. Recent literature has primarily focused on in-corporating additional motion conditioning techniques into the image-to-video generation process. LivePhoto [11] es-timates motion intensity from text prompts. Some stud-ies [24, 64, 70, 73] employ sparse, dense or 3D pose se-quences to constrain character movements in the video. Other works [8, 34, 37, 51] utilize or first predict opti-cal flow to guide motion within the video, particularly in cases involving camera trajectory guidance [30, 60]. While these studies have introduced various motion conditioning 2techniques, their dependence on semantic representations as conditions restricts generative flexibility. Moreover, their reliance on RGB pixel-level supervision hampers the learn-ing of 3D geometric structures and physical consistency. In contrast, our approach leverages semantic representations as supervision signals rather than conditions, aiming to en-hance 3D geometric structure stability and temporal identity consistency without compromising flexibility. 

2.3. Diffusion-based Semantic Representation 

As a form of generalized self-supervised learning, the inter-nal features of diffusion models can serve as highly effec-tive semantic representations. Research on diffusion mod-els and semantic representations has primarily focused on two directions: on one hand, some studies [12, 61] lever-age internal features of diffusion models to perform dense discriminative tasks, such as object segmentation [31, 63] and monocular depth estimation [18, 26]. On the other hand, other studies [25, 29, 42, 67, 71] propose to opti-mize the semantic representations within diffusion models, enhancing both training efficiency and generation quality. REPA [67] attempts to optimize image diffusion models by utilizing self-supervised semantic representations [39] through knowledge distillation. Our work aligns more closely with the latter. While recent studies remain on im-age generation models, we aim to extend these insights to the video generation domain, particularly for the task of hu-man image-to-video animation. A concurrent study [65] simultaneously generates and supervises video generation models along with their corresponding segmentation masks or depth maps. However, it neglects temporal identity con-sistency and requires modifications to the transformer back-bone. 

# 3. Motivation 

To address the issues in human image animation, we con-sider to enhance the internal features of the diffusion trans-former through semantic representation alignment, aiming to achieve higher generation quality and consistency in long video generation eventually. In this section, we outline the motivations behind our methodology and training strategy. We begin by presenting insights on how semantic repre-sentation alignment can mitigate the identified issues . Ex-isting methods [24, 64, 70, 73], while incorporating extra conditions, still primarily rely on RGB pixel-level supervi-sion. Without explicit proxy tasks, they lack emphasis on learning 3D geometry, physical plausibility, or long-term consistency, making it difficult to maintain accurate spa-tial relationships and temporal coherence across extended sequences. Our approach addresses these issues by intro-ducing explicit proxy tasks including depth and identity su-pervision, to enforce the model to learn geometric structure and temporal consistency. This targeted supervision helps the model encode meaningful spatial and temporal cues, re-sulting in better spatial fidelity and long-term consistency in generated videos. Specifically, for limb twisting , artifacts such as dis-torted, blurred, or even disappearing limbs are commonly observed during movement, especially in fine-grained body parts like fingers or during rapid motion. These artifacts stem from the model’s limited capacity to accurately model 3D body movements. To address this, we apply structure representation alignment to distill prior knowledge of 3D human motion into the diffusion transformer. Structure rep-resentation alignment directs the supervision to focus pri-marily on the 3D human geometric structure, effectively mitigating the influence of texture information. For facial distortion , the diversity and subtlety of human facial ex-pressions often cause facial features in human image anima-tion to shift with motion, gradually deviating from the orig-inal reference image. We believe this distortion arises from the model’s difficulty in maintaining fine-grained temporal consistency during extensive movement. To mitigate this, we introduce ID representation alignment to explicitly su-pervise temporal identity consistency in generated videos. A straightforward implementation might be to decode the video latents predicted by the diffusion transformer us-ing a VAE and directly supervise the resulting RGB frames. However, for long video generation, this method is im-practical because the VAE decoding step incurs significant memory overhead to store gradients, even though the VAE parameters remain fixed during backpropagation. There-fore, we adopt a two-stage training strategy instead of di-rectly supervising the RGB frames. In the first stage, we pretrain an alignment module using knowledge distillation to extract semantic representations from the VAE video la-tents. In the second stage, we fix the module and employ it to supervise the diffusion transformer. 

# 4. Method 

In this section, we start by formulating the problem of diffusion-based human image animation in Section 4.1. Next, we describe the pretraining pipeline for the proposed alignment modules in Section 4.2. Finally, we provide de-tails on fine-tuning the diffusion transformer with our se-mantic representation alignment supervision in Section 4.3. 

4.1. Problem Definition 

In human image animation task, the generation process will be conditioned on a given reference image Iref ∈ RH×W ×3

of the corresponding individual, and a text prompt T de-scribing the content of the human motion video. The ob-jective is to generate a sequence of N video frames, rep-resented as V = {I1, I 2, . . . , I N }, where each frame Ii ∈

RH×W ×3. Here, H and W denote the height and width of each frame, respectively, and the generated video sequence 3VAE        

> ❄Structure
> Alignment
> Module
> "
> Knowledge
> Distillation
> Structure Representation Space
> Depth Latent
> Structure Representation RGB Video Frames
> RGB Video Depth
> (a) Structure Representation Alignment Module Pretraining Pipeline (b) ID Representation Alignment Module Pretraining Pipeline
> VAE
> ❄
> RGB Video Frames RGB Video Depth
> Depth Latent Video Latent
> Concatenate ID
> Alignment
> Module
> "
> ArcFace ❄
> ID Representation Space
> Knowledge
> Distillation
> ID Representation
> Face Embedding

Figure 2. Alignment Module Pretraining Pipeline Overview . (a) The Structure Alignment Module takes clean video latents as input, and outputs depth latents that align with the VAE-encoded RGB video depth. (b) The ID Alignment Module predicts facial representations based on video latents concatenated with depth latents, and aligns them with ArcFace features. 

should adhere to the appearance and context described by 

Iref and T . The generation process is formulated as follows: 

V = {I1, I 2, . . . , I N } = Φ( Iref , T ; Θ)  (1) where Φ represents the diffusion-based human image ani-mation model with trainable parameters Θ.

4.2. Alignment Module Pretraining 

In the following section, we provide a detailed description of the pretraining pipeline for the two alignment modules. 

4.2.1. Structure Alignment Module Pretraining 

In addition to standard latent diffusion model training, we introduce an auxiliary task that predicts the structure repre-sentations from video latents. Specifically, we formulate the structure representation prediction as a human-centric video depth estimation task. For the structure alignment module, we use the CogVideoX transformer architecture [66] with a reduced number of layers, leveraging the fact that depth estimation and video generation are both dense prediction tasks. The core of our alignment involves using RGB video latents to predict depth latents with the same noise level, which leads to two formulations: one that uses clean RGB latents as input and another that employs noisy ones. As shown in Figure 2, we begin by pretraining the struc-ture alignment module with clean RGB latents as input. The module takes the noiseless video latent z0 as input and out-puts the corresponding depth latent ˜d0(z0).

˜d0(z0) = fSAM (z0) (2) where  fSAM  represents the structure alignment module. We use Video Depth Anything [7] as the teacher model to ex-tract pseudo ground truth video depth D. With brighter colors denoting closer distances, we colorize the single-channel video depth maps into RGB depth maps, and ap-ply the VAE to encode the RGB depth D into the depth latent d0. All other models remain fixed during the struc-ture alignment module pretraining. The training objective minimizes the MSE loss between the pseudo ground truth depth latent d0 and the predicted depth latent: 

LMSE = d0 − ˜d0(z0) 2

(3) In case of employing a noisy RGB latent zt as input, our structure alignment module instead predicts the correspond-ing noisy depth latent ˜dt(zt). This prediction is conditioned on timestep t, and equations 2 and 3 are transformed into: 

˜dt(zt) = fSAM (zt, t ) (4) 

LMSE = dt − ˜dt(zt) 2

(5) 

4.2.2. ID Alignment Module Pretraining 

Simultaneously, we introduce another auxiliary task to pre-dict ID representations from clean video latents, framing ID representation prediction as a face recognition feature extraction task. Given the relative simplicity of this task, we employ a convolutional network composed of ResNet blocks [19] to extract ID representations. Since noisy video latents cannot effectively capture face recognition features, we use noiseless video latents as input for ID representation prediction. As shown in Figure 2, the input to our alignment module is the original video latent z0 concatenated with the ground truth depth latent d0, allowing it to predict the correspond-ing ID representations ˜f (z0, d0) for each frame: 

˜f (z0, d0) = fID (z0, d0) (6) where  fID  represents the ID alignment module. During pre-training, we use the ground truth video latent z0 and depth latent d0 as input, while in fine-tuning, we will switch to the predicted results. Since most videos only contain a sin-gle individual, we apply face detection to each video frame 4VAE 

❄

Diffusion Transformer 

🔥        

> Structure
> Alignment
> Module
> ID
> Alignment
> Module
> ❄
> ❄
> RGB Video Frames
> Noisy Video Latent Clean Video Latent
> Structure Representation
> ID Representation
> Diffusion Loss
> Structure Loss
> ID Loss

Figure 3. Diffusion Transformer Fine-tuning Pipeline Overview. With the assistance of the pretrained structure alignment module and ID alignment module, we apply additional supervision to the diffusion transformer fine-tuning through semantic representation alignment. We fix the two pretrained alignment modules, and only fine-tune diffusion transformer backbone. 

using the ArcFace model [13] to automatically locate the face and extract its features. The detected facial features serve as the facial representation f for the reference image. The training objective is to minimize the L1 loss between the normalized ground truth face embedding f and the pre-dicted face embedding ˜f (z0, d0):

L1 = f − ˜f (z0, d0) (7) 

4.3. Diffusion Transformer Fine-tuning 

After obtaining the two pretrained alignment modules, we will leverage them for applying additional supervision to the diffusion transformer fine-tuning through semantic rep-resentation alignment. For a noisy video latent zt ∈

RB×l×c×h×w, the diffusion transformer predicts the added noise ˜ϵθ (zt, t, c) based on the text condition c, and cal-culates the corresponding original video latent ˜z0. The scheduler then denoises for one step and obtains ˜zt−1. In case of clean RGB depth input, the structure alignment module takes ˜z0 as input to predict the clean depth latent 

˜d0(˜ z0) ∈ RB×l×c×h×w corresponding to the input. Simul-taneously, the colorized RGB depth D will be encoded by VAE to obtain the ground truth latents d0. The structure loss LS can be expressed as the MSE loss between d0 and 

˜d0(˜ z0)) :

LS = ∥d0 − ˜d0(˜ z0)∥2 (8) If we employ the noisy depth formulation, we exploit 

˜zt−1 as input and the structure loss LS will be expressed as: 

LS = ∥dt−1 − ˜dt−1(˜ zt−1, t )∥2 (9) The ID representation alignment module takes the pre-dicted clean video latent ˜z0 concatenated with the predicted depth latent ˜d0(˜ z0) as input and predicts the ID representa-tion ˜f (˜ z0, ˜d0) ∈ RB×l×512 . The ground truth ID represen-tation f is computed by the alignment module using z0 and 

d0 as input. The ID loss LID is formulated as the L1 loss between f and ˜f (˜ z0, ˜d0):

LID = ∥f − ˜f (˜ z0, ˜d0)∥ (10) For the noisy RGB depth formulation in the structure alignment module, we directly use the ground truth d0 to replace ˜d0(˜ z0) to calculate LID . We omit the alternative expression of LID for simplicity. In summary, the final loss Lfinal is a weighted sum of the diffusion loss Lt, structure loss LS, and ID loss LID , which can be expressed as follows: 

Lt = Et∼[1 ,T ],z0,ϵ

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t, c)∥2i

(11) 

Lfinal = Lt + λSLS + λID LID  (12) where λS, and λID are the weights of each respective loss component. 

# 5. Experiments 

In this section, we begin by outlining our experimental setup, including the dataset and implementation details in Section 5.1. We then compare our method with other mod-els leveraging qualitative visualization and quantitative met-rics in Section 5.2. Finally, we present ablation study results in Section 5.3 to demonstrate the effectiveness of our pro-posed semantic representation alignment supervision. 

5.1. Experimental Setup 

5.1.1. Dataset 

We fine-tune our model on the OpenVid-1M [35] dataset. To filter for videos containing humans, we use YOLOv8 [55] to perform human detection on the first frame of each video, retaining only those with detected humans. Since most videos in OpenVid are TV-show-style with lim-ited character movement, we supplement the dataset with 5Model Image-level Metrics Video-level Metrics SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ FID ↓ CPBD ↓ Motion Score ↓ Text Score ↑ ID Score ↑

GT - - - - 0.5347 - 0.2897 0.6465 VideoComposer 0.1542 28.21 0.6721 1375.52 0.6444 55.01 0.2685 0.0423 I2VGen-XL 0.1943 28.66 0.7467 1394.52 0.2075* 67.10 0.2540 0.1492 DynamiCrafter 0.3143 27.43 0.4889 2104.16 0.8333 62.81 0.2368 0.0246 SEINE 0.3424 29.14 0.5275 556.29 0.6218 28.08 0.2879 0.1702 ConsistI2V 0.7361 31.32 0.2811 924.55 0.4182* 14.83 0.2728 0.0459 SVD 0.3888 29.60 0.4590 467.95 0.3024* 18.58 0.2778 0.3818 CogVideoX 0.7482 32.40 0.1972 247.37 0.5839 0.9426 0.2942 0.5087 SemanticREPA 0.7502 32.51 0.2011 213.09 0.5817 0.4012 0.2956 0.6339    

> Table 1. Quantitative Comparison with Other Baselines . Our SemanticREPA outperforms all baselines across all metrics on our curated test set. Bold indicates the best results, and underlining denotes the second-best. Values marked with * indicate less reliable CPBD scores.

in-house data consisting primarily of vertical-format try-on videos featuring more intensive character motion. The OpenVid videos provide approximately 300K video-text pairs, while the in-house data contributes around 430K video-text pairs. Given CogVideoX’s fixed resolution of 480×720 pixels, we sample 49 frames per video at 8 fps, re-sizing them to 480×720 resolution. For vertical videos, we resize the height to 480 pixels and pad both sides to reach a width of 720 pixels. 

5.1.2. Implementation Details 

Our base model is CogVideoX 1.0 [66], which uses T5 [45] as the text encoder. For video depth feature extraction, we employ Video Depth Anything [7] for temporal consistent depth estimation. For ID embedding extraction, we use the Arc2Face [40] version of the ArcFace model [13] to obtain face recognition embeddings. For further details, please re-fer to the supplementary material. 

5.2. Comparison with Other Methods 

5.2.1. Evaluation Metrics 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed semantic rep-resentation alignment supervision, we collected a test set of 200 previously unseen videos with significant character motion for a fair comparison of generation quality and con-sistency across models. We perform quantitative evaluation from both image-level quality and overall video-level qual-ity perspectives. For image-level metrics, following exist-ing work, we use Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) [59], Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) [23], Learned Percep-tual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [68], and Fr´ echet In-ception Distance (FID) [20]. Additionally, we employ Cu-mulative Probability Blur Detection (CPBD) [36] to assess the blur level in generated video frames. For video-level metrics, we use the average ArcFace embedding cosine sim-ilarity as the ID score to measure ID consistency within the generated videos. To compare motion modeling capabil-ities, we use RAFT [53] to extract optical flow from the videos, colorize the flow maps, and calculate FID on these maps as the motion score, following PhysGen [32]. We also utilize average CLIP [44] cosine similarity to assess the alignment between generated videos and the text descrip-tions. We do not use Fr´ echet Video Distance (FVD) [54] due to the number of videos in our test set. 

5.2.2. Baseline Comparison 

We compare our SemanticREPA against current state-of-the-art image-to-video models, including Video-Composer [57], I2VGen-XL [69], DynamiCrafter [62], SEINE [10], ConsistI2V [48], and SVD [5]. Each of these models can generate videos based on a given first-frame image, with text prompts as optional conditions. Since these UNet-based models cannot directly generate videos at the desired length and resolution, we apply a sliding window approach to obtain the full sequence of 49 frames and resize the generated frames to 480×720 pixels. Addi-tionally, we compare our model to the base CogVideoX without fine-tuning. 

5.2.3. Quantitative Evaluation Results 

The quantitative evaluation results are shown in Table 1. Our SemanticREPA significantly outperforms all others across all evaluation metrics, achieving state-of-the-art per-formance. Image-level metric results demonstrate that our model better captures the distribution of human motion im-ages. The CPBD score indicates that our generated images contain less blur, reflecting more stable human structures. Notably, some models exhibit CPBD scores far below the ground truth, due to their inability to generate meaning-ful images over long video sequences, making their CPBD scores less reliable. For video-level metrics, the motion score shows that our generated videos have motion patterns most similar to the ground truth distribution, while the ID 6score further verifies that our generated videos achieve the highest level of ID consistency. These results demonstrate that our model significantly improves the human structure stability and ID consistency in generated videos without compromising other capabilities. 

5.2.4. Qualitative Evaluation Results 

We present the qualitative comparison results in the Supple-mentary Material, showing that our SemanticREPA gener-ates videos with significantly better human structure stabil-ity and ID consistency, while other baselines fail to achieve this. This strongly demonstrates our SemanticREPA’s supe-rior ability to model long character motions with enhanced consistency, effectively avoiding issues of facial distortion and limb twisting. 

5.3. Ablation studies 

5.3.1. Structure Alignment Module Inputs 

As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, our structure alignment module has two implementations. The first approach takes the clean RGB video latent as input. Specifically, it uti-lizes the ground truth video latent z0 during alignment mod-ule pretraining and the transformer-predicted ˜z0 during dif-fusion transformer fine-tuning. We denote this method as 

LS(z0). The second approach employs the noisy video la-tents, with the t-step noisy video latent zt during alignment module pretraining and the scheduler step result ˜zt−1 dur-ing fine-tuning. We denote this method as LS(zt).As shown in Table 2, the ablation component ’w/ LS(zt)’yields a slightly better motion score; however, it results in a significant decrease in both ID and CPBD scores. In contrast, ’w/ LS(z0)’ demonstrates superior human struc-ture stability and ID consistency. We attribute this phe-nomenon to LS(zt) destructing more texture information due to the higher noise level. Consequently, the supervi-sion becomes more biased towards overall human structure movement, capturing better motion patterns. However, the lack of fine-grained facial texture details makes the supervi-sion effect of LS(zt) less effective in maintaining ID consis-tency compared to LS(z0). After careful consideration, we select LS(z0) as the final implementation to more reliably generate consistent human structures. 

5.3.2. ID Alignment Module Inputs 

Our ID alignment module also has two implementations, differing in whether to utilize depth latents as input. In case of using depth latents, we concatenate the RGB video la-tent with the corresponding depth latent along the channel dimension. To compare the quality of the feature distributions learned by these two implementations, we randomly select 

200 videos and extract corresponding ID representations us-ing each ID alignment module implementation. We then measure the average intra-video feature distance and the av-erage inter-video feature distance. The intra-video feature distance reflects the compactness of ID representation dis-tributions within a single video, whereas the inter-video fea-ture distance indicates the distinguishability of ID represen-tation distributions between different characters. A larger difference between the inter-video and intra-video feature distances demonstrates the effectiveness of the learned ID representations. The results, shown in Table 3, indicate that the first method, i.e., utilizing depth latents as input, per-forms better, as it yields a larger difference between aver-age intra-video and inter-video distances. We attribute this improvement to the concatenated depth latents, which serve as an implicit facial mask and enhance the module’s ability to detect human faces more effectively. Consequently, we choose the depth latent concatenation approach as the final implementation for our ID alignment module. 

5.3.3. Semantic Representation Alignment Supervision 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed semantic representation alignment supervision, we conducted a de-tailed ablation analysis, comparing fine-tuning without ad-ditional supervision, fine-tuning with LS, fine-tuning with 

LID , and fine-tuning with both LID and LS. As shown in Table 2, fine-tuning with LS significantly reduces CPBD and Motion Score values, while fine-tuning with LID no-tably improves the ID Score, both without impacting other metrics. This suggests that our structure representation alignment supervision enables the model to better learn pri-ors on human motion, producing more stable human struc-tures, while ID representation alignment supervision en-hances character consistency in generated videos. Finally, combining both types of supervision, i.e., fine-tuning with both LID and LS, yields the best results in terms of structural stability and ID consistency, validating the effectiveness of our approach. Furthermore, we investigated the impact of the weights assigned to semantic representation alignment supervision. Assigning excessively high weights disrupts the original priors of the video generation model, whereas assigning weights that are too low fails to provide effective supervi-sion. Therefore, selecting appropriate weights is crucial. As shown in Table 2, after thoroughly evaluating the influence on various metrics, we set the weight λS for the structure loss LS to 0.01 and the weight λID for the ID loss LID to 1.This configuration achieves a balanced performance across all metrics, attaining state-of-the-art results. 

# 6. Conclusion 

In this paper, we address the persistent challenges of limb twisting and facial distortion in human image animation, particularly in generating long videos and modeling com-plex motion. We introduce a novel approach that leverages 7Model λS λID 

Image-level Metrics Video-level Metrics SSIM ↑ PSNR ↑ LPIPS ↓ FID ↓ CPBD ↓ Motion Score ↓ Text Score ↑ ID Score ↑

GT - - - - - - 0.5347 - 0.2897 0.6465 CogVideoX - - 0.7482 32.40 0.1972 247.37 0.5839 0.9426 0.2942 0.5087 CogVideoX F - - 0.7512 32.50 0.1968 210.99 0.5839 0.7481 0.2959 0.5098 

LS(zt) 0.1 - 0.7521 32.52 0.2009 214.22 0.5942 0.5123 0.2951 0.5987 

LS(zt) 0.01 - 0.7512 32.51 0.2019 212.97 0.5922 0.4427 0.2952 0.5751 

LS(z0) 0.1 - 0.7489 32.47 0.2026 209.60 0.5911 0.7299 0.2950 0.6063 

LS(z0) 0.01 - 0.7485 32.52 0.2026 212.21 0.5837 0.5352 0.2953 0.6118 

LID - 10 0.7467 32.44 0.2056 226.54 0.5920 0.6338 0.2955 0.6451 

LID - 1 0.7477 32.49 0.2045 219.90 0.5853 0.5397 0.2955 0.6223 

LID & LS(z0) 0.01 1 0.7502 32.51 0.2011 213.09 0.5817 0.4012 0.2956 0.6339 

Table 2. Ablation Analysis on Supervision Implementations. CogVideoX F stands for CogVideoX fine-tuned on our dataset. 

Method Intra-Video Dist. Inter-Video Dist. w/ depth input 0.0417 0.1299 w/o depth input 0.0487 0.1084 

Table 3. Ablation Analysis on ID Alignment Module Imple-mentations. Intra-Video Dist. represents the average intra-video distance, while Inter-Video Dist. represents the average inter-video distance. 

semantic representation alignment as supervision rather than as conditional input, preserving generation flexibil-ity while enhancing quality. Our method incorporates a structure alignment module and an ID alignment module to ensure consistent human structure and identity through-out generated sequences. By pretraining the structure align-ment module on VAE-encoded video latents to predict the structure representations, and using it to supervise the diffu-sion model, we achieve coherent human structures aligned with ground truth. The ID alignment module further en-sures identity consistency, leveraging predicted structure representations for further enhanced alignment in critical regions. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations on our cu-rated test set demonstrate the superiority of our approach over current state-of-the-art image-to-video models, with improved performance across multiple metrics, offering a more robust solution for generating long, consistent human motion videos. 

# References 

[1] Jason Baldridge, Jakob Bauer, Mukul Bhutani, Nicole Brich-tova, Andrew Bunner, Kelvin Chan, Yichang Chen, Sander Dieleman, Yuqing Du, Zach Eaton-Rosen, et al. Imagen 3, 2024. 1 [2] Fan Bao, Chendong Xiang, Gang Yue, Guande He, Hongzhou Zhu, Kaiwen Zheng, Min Zhao, Shilong Liu, Yaole Wang, and Jun Zhu. Vidu: a highly consistent, dynamic and skilled text-to-video generator with diffusion models, 2024. 2 [3] Omer Bar-Tal, Hila Chefer, Omer Tov, Charles Her-rmann, Roni Paiss, Shiran Zada, Ariel Ephrat, Junhwa Hur, Guanghui Liu, Amit Raj, et al. Lumiere: A space-time diffu-sion model for video generation. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , 2024. 2 [4] James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, Wesam Manassra, Prafulla Dhariwal, Casey Chu, Yunxin Jiao, and Aditya Ramesh. Improving image genera-tion with better captions. https://cdn.openai.com/ papers/dall-e-3.pdf , 2023. Accessed: 2025-07-21. 1[5] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, Varun Jampani, and Robin Rombach. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets, 2023. 2, 6 [6] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dock-horn, Seung Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis. Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with la-tent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023. 2 [7] Sili Chen, Hengkai Guo, Shengnan Zhu, Feihu Zhang, Zi-long Huang, Jiashi Feng, and Bingyi Kang. Video depth anything: Consistent depth estimation for super-long videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 1, 4, 6 [8] Tsai-Shien Chen, Chieh Hubert Lin, Hung-Yu Tseng, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Motion-conditioned diffu-sion model for controllable video synthesis, 2023. 1, 2 [9] Tsai-Shien Chen, Aliaksandr Siarohi, Willi Menapace, Eka-terina Deyneka, Hsiang-wei Chao, Byung Eun Jeon, Yuwei Fang, Hsin-Ying Lee, Jian Ren, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Sergey Tulyakov. Panda-70m: Captioning 70m videos with multiple cross-modality teachers. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,2024. 1, 2 

8[10] Xinyuan Chen, Yaohui Wang, Lingjun Zhang, Shaobin Zhuang, Xin Ma, Jiashuo Yu, Yali Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Seine: Short-to-long video diffusion model for generative transition and prediction. In Proceed-ings of the International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2023. 6 [11] Xi Chen, Zhiheng Liu, Mengting Chen, Yutong Feng, Yu Liu, Yujun Shen, and Hengshuang Zhao. Livephoto: Real image animation with text-guided motion control. In Pro-ceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision ,2024. 2 [12] Xinlei Chen, Zhuang Liu, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. De-constructing denoising diffusion models for self-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 3 [13] Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2019. 1, 5, 6 [14] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas M¨ uller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Alex Goodwin, Yan-nik Marek, and Robin Rombach. Scaling rectified flow trans-formers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. 1, 2 [15] Rohit Girdhar, Mannat Singh, Andrew Brown, Quentin Du-val, Samaneh Azadi, Sai Saketh Rambhatla, Akbar Shah, Xi Yin, Devi Parikh, and Ishan Misra. Emu video: Factorizing text-to-video generation by explicit image conditioning. In 

Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vi-sion , 2024. 2 [16] Google. Imagen 2. https://deepmind.google/ technologies/imagen- 2/ , 2023. Accessed: 2025-07-21. 1 [17] Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. In Proceed-ings of the International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2024. 2 [18] Jing He, Haodong Li, Wei Yin, Yixun Liang, Leheng Li, Kaiqiang Zhou, Hongbo Liu, Bingbing Liu, and Ying-Cong Chen. Lotus: Diffusion-based visual foundation model for high-quality dense prediction. In Proceedings of the Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 3 [19] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016. 4 [20] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilib-rium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 2017. 6 [21] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 2020. 1 [22] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale pretraining for text-to-video generation via transformers. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. 2 [23] Alain Hore and Djemel Ziou. Image quality metrics: Psnr vs. ssim. In International Conference on Pattern Recognition ,2010. 6 [24] Li Hu, Xin Gao, Peng Zhang, Ke Sun, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis for character animation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024. 1, 2, 3 [25] Hyeonho Jeong, Chun-Hao Paul Huang, Jong Chul Ye, Niloy Mitra, and Duygu Ceylan. Track4gen: Teaching video diffu-sion models to track points improves video generation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 3 [26] Bingxin Ke, Anton Obukhov, Shengyu Huang, Nando Met-zger, Rodrigo Caye Daudt, and Konrad Schindler. Repurpos-ing diffusion-based image generators for monocular depth estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024. 3 [27] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding varia-tional bayes. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2014. 1 [28] KlingAI. Kling ai. https://klingai.com/ , 2024. Accessed: 2025-07-21. 1, 2 [29] Tianhong Li, Dina Katabi, and Kaiming He. Return of unconditional generation: A self-supervised representation generation method. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2024. 3 [30] Yaowei Li, Xintao Wang, Zhaoyang Zhang, Zhouxia Wang, Ziyang Yuan, Liangbin Xie, Yuexian Zou, and Ying Shan. Image conductor: Precision control for interactive video syn-thesis. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2025. 1, 2 [31] Ziyi Li, Qinye Zhou, Xiaoyun Zhang, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Guiding text-to-image diffusion model towards grounded generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023. 3 [32] Shaowei Liu, Zhongzheng Ren, Saurabh Gupta, and Shen-long Wang. Physgen: Rigid-body physics-grounded image-to-video generation. In Proceedings of the European Con-ference on Computer Vision , 2024. 6 [33] Xin Ma, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Gengyun Jia, Ziwei Liu, Yuan-Fang Li, Cunjian Chen, and Yu Qiao. Latte: La-tent diffusion transformer for video generation. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. 2 [34] Xin Ma, Yaohui Wang, Gengyun Jia, Xinyuan Chen, Yuan-Fang Li, Cunjian Chen, and Yu Qiao. Cinemo: Consis-tent and controllable image animation with motion diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 1, 2 [35] Kepan Nan, Rui Xie, Penghao Zhou, Tiehan Fan, Zhen-heng Yang, Zhijie Chen, Xiang Li, Jian Yang, and Ying Tai. 

9Openvid-1m: A large-scale high-quality dataset for text-to-video generation. In Proceedings of the International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2025. 1, 2, 5 [36] Niranjan D Narvekar and Lina J Karam. A no-reference im-age blur metric based on the cumulative probability of blur detection (cpbd). IEEE Transactions on Image Processing ,2011. 6 [37] Muyao Niu, Xiaodong Cun, Xintao Wang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Yinqiang Zheng. Mofa-video: Controllable image animation via generative motion field adaptions in frozen image-to-video diffusion model. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision , 2024. 1, 2 [38] OpenAI. Video generation models as world simula-tors. https : / / openai . com / index / video -generation - models - as - world - simulators/ ,2024. Accessed: 2025-07-21. 1 [39] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Theo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Rus-sell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Hu Xu, Vasu Sharma, Shang-Wen Li, Wojciech Galuba, Mike Rabbat, Mido Assran, Nico-las Ballas, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bo-janowski. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2023. 3 [40] Foivos Paraperas Papantoniou, Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Jiankang Deng, Bernhard Kainz, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arc2face: A foundation model for id-consistent human faces. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision , 2024. 1, 6 [41] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion mod-els with transformers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023. 1, 2 [42] Pablo Pernias, Dominic Rampas, Mats Leon Richter, Christopher Pal, and Marc Aubreville. W¨ urstchen: An ef-ficient architecture for large-scale text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. 3 [43] Adam Polyak, Amit Zohar, Andrew Brown, Andros Tjandra, Animesh Sinha, Ann Lee, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Chih-Yao Ma, Ching-Yao Chuang, et al. Movie gen: A cast of media foundation models, 2024. 1, 2 [44] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learn-ing transferable visual models from natural language super-vision. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. 6 [45] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of machine learning research , 2020. 6 [46] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. 1 [47] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image gener-ation with clip latents, 2022. 1 [48] Weiming Ren, Huan Yang, Ge Zhang, Cong Wei, Xinrun Du, Wenhao Huang, and Wenhu Chen. Consisti2v: Enhancing visual consistency for image-to-video generation. Transac-tions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. 6 [49] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bjorn Ommer. High-resolution image syn-thesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion , 2022. 1, 2 [50] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. 1 [51] Xiaoyu Shi, Zhaoyang Huang, Fu-Yun Wang, Weikang Bian, Dasong Li, Yi Zhang, Manyuan Zhang, Ka Chun Cheung, Simon See, Hongwei Qin, et al. Motion-i2v: Consistent and controllable image-to-video generation with explicit motion modeling. SIGGRAPH , 2024. 1, 2 [52] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denois-ing diffusion implicit models. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. 1 [53] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision , 2020. 6 [54] Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Rapha¨ el Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and Sylvain Gelly. Fvd: A new metric for video generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations ,2019. 6 [55] Rejin Varghese and M Sambath. Yolov8: A novel object detection algorithm with enhanced performance and robust-ness. In International Conference on Advances in Data Engi-neering and Intelligent Computing Systems (ADICS) , 2024. 5[56] Jiuniu Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Dayou Chen, Yingya Zhang, Xiang Wang, and Shiwei Zhang. Modelscope text-to-video technical report, 2023. 2 [57] Xiang Wang, Hangjie Yuan, Shiwei Zhang, Dayou Chen, Ji-uniu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jin-gren Zhou. Videocomposer: Compositional video synthesis with motion controllability. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 2024. 6 [58] Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Xin Ma, Shangchen Zhou, Ziqi Huang, Yi Wang, Ceyuan Yang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Peiqing Yang, et al. Lavie: High-quality video generation with cascaded latent diffusion models, 2023. 2 [59] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Si-moncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing ,2004. 6 [60] Zhenzhi Wang, Yixuan Li, Yanhong Zeng, Youqing Fang, Yuwei Guo, Wenran Liu, Jing Tan, Kai Chen, Tianfan Xue, 

10 Bo Dai, et al. Humanvid: Demystifying training data for camera-controllable human image animation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. 1, 2 [61] Weilai Xiang, Hongyu Yang, Di Huang, and Yunhong Wang. Denoising diffusion autoencoders are unified self-supervised learners. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023. 3 [62] Jinbo Xing, Menghan Xia, Yong Zhang, Haoxin Chen, Wangbo Yu, Hanyuan Liu, Gongye Liu, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, and Tien-Tsin Wong. Dynamicrafter: Animating open-domain images with video diffusion priors. In Pro-ceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision ,2024. 6 [63] Jiarui Xu, Sifei Liu, Arash Vahdat, Wonmin Byeon, Xiao-long Wang, and Shalini De Mello. Open-Vocabulary Panop-tic Segmentation with Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2023. 3 [64] Zhongcong Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Jia-Wei Liu, Chenxu Zhang, Jiashi Feng, and Mike Zheng Shou. Magicanimate: Temporally consistent human image animation using diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,2024. 1, 2, 3 [65] Lehan Yang, Lu Qi, Xiangtai Li, Sheng Li, Varun Jampani, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Unified dense prediction of video diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 3 [66] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video dif-fusion models with an expert transformer. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. 1, 2, 4, 6 [67] Sihyun Yu, Sangkyung Kwak, Huiwon Jang, Jongheon Jeong, Jonathan Huang, Jinwoo Shin, and Saining Xie. Representation alignment for generation: Training diffusion transformers is easier than you think. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. 3 [68] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shecht-man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion , 2018. 6 [69] Shiwei Zhang, Jiayu Wang, Yingya Zhang, Kang Zhao, Hangjie Yuan, Zhiwu Qing, Xiang Wang, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou. I2vgen-xl: High-quality image-to-video syn-thesis via cascaded diffusion models, 2023. 2, 6 [70] Yuang Zhang, Jiaxi Gu, Li-Wen Wang, Han Wang, Junqi Cheng, Yuefeng Zhu, and Fangyuan Zou. Mimicmo-tion: High-quality human motion video generation with confidence-aware pose guidance. In Proceedings of the In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. 1, 2, 3[71] Lirui Zhao, Tianshuo Yang, Wenqi Shao, Yuxin Zhang, Yu Qiao, Ping Luo, Kaipeng Zhang, and Rongrong Ji. Diffree: Text-guided shape free object inpainting with dif-fusion model, 2024. 3 [72] Zangwei Zheng, Xiangyu Peng, Tianji Yang, Chenhui Shen, Shenggui Li, Hongxin Liu, Yukun Zhou, Tianyi Li, and Yang You. Open-sora: Democratizing efficient video production for all. https://github.com/hpcaitech/Open-Sora , 2024. Accessed: 2025-07-21. 1, 2 [73] Shenhao Zhu, Junming Leo Chen, Zuozhuo Dai, Yinghui Xu, Xun Cao, Yao Yao, Hao Zhu, and Siyu Zhu. Champ: Controllable and consistent human image animation with 3d parametric guidance. In Proceedings of the European Con-ference on Computer Vision , 2024. 1, 2, 3 

11 Improving Human Image Animation via Semantic Representation Alignment 

# Supplementary Material 

# 7. Implementation Details 

Our base model is CogVideoX 1.0, which uses T5 as the text encoder, with VAE compression ratios of 4 for temporal and 

8 × 8 for spatial dimensions. Our experiments are conducted on 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. We use 8-bit Adam as the optimizer with a learning rate of 1×10 −5. Both the structure alignment module pretraining and diffusion transformer fine-tuning utilize gradient checkpointing to reduce CUDA memory requirements. During the pretraining phase of the alignment modules, the batch size is set to 32 for structure alignment module and 48 for ID alignment module, while in the diffusion transformer fine-tuning phase, it is set to 8. We pretrain the structure alignment module on the collected dataset for 15 , 000 steps and the ID alignment module for 2, 000 steps. Finally, we fine-tune the diffusion transformer with the pretrained alignment modules for 5, 000 steps. The weights for structure loss and ID loss are set to 0.01 and 1, respectively. 

# 8. Qualitative Visualization 

8.1. Qualitative Comparison with Other Baselines 

We conduct qualitative comparison of our method against other baselines. As illustrated in Figure 4, Figure 5, Figure 6, and Figure 7, our proposed method demonstrate significantly better character consistency and human structure stability. 1Reference Image Generated Video  

> Our Method  SVD  ConsistI2V CogVideoX  SEINE  I2VGen -XL  VideoComposer DynamiCrafter
> Reference Image Generated Video

Figure 4. Qualitative Comparison with other baselines. Our method significantly outperforms other models in terms of human structure stability and ID consistency, effectively avoiding issues of facial distortion and limb twisting. 

2Reference Image Generated Video  

> Our Method  SVD  ConsistI2V CogVideoX  SEINE  I2VGen -XL  VideoComposer DynamiCrafter
> Reference Image Generated Video

Figure 5. Qualitative Comparison with Other Baselines. Our method significantly outperforms other models in terms of human structure stability and ID consistency, effectively avoiding issues of facial distortion and limb twisting. 

3Reference Image Generated Video  

> Our Method  SVD  ConsistI2V CogVideoX  SEINE  I2VGen -XL  VideoComposer DynamiCrafter
> Reference Image Generated Video

Figure 6. Qualitative Comparison with other baselines. Our method significantly outperforms other models in terms of human structure stability and ID consistency, effectively avoiding issues of facial distortion and limb twisting. 

4Reference Image Generated Video  

> Our Method  SVD  ConsistI2V CogVideoX  SEINE  I2VGen -XL  VideoComposer DynamiCrafter
> Reference Image Generated Video

Figure 7. Qualitative Comparison with other baselines. Our method significantly outperforms other models in terms of human structure stability and ID consistency, effectively avoiding issues of facial distortion and limb twisting. 

58.2. Qualitative Ablation Results 

As illustrated in Figure 8, Figure 9, and Figure 10, the qualitative ablation analysis suggests that our structure representation alignment supervision allows the model to better capture priors on human motion, resulting in more stable human structures. Additionally, ID representation alignment supervision enhances character consistency in the generated videos. Combining both types of supervision, i.e., fine-tuning with both LID and Lstruc , yields the best results in terms of structural stability and ID consistency, thereby validating the effectiveness of our approach. w/ Both  

> Supervision
> w/ Structure
> Supervision
> w/o Any
> Supervision
> w/ ID
> Supervision
> Reference Image Generated Video

Figure 8. Qualitative Ablation Comparison Results. Our structure representation alignment supervision enables the model to produce stable human structures, while ID representation alignment supervision enhances character consistency in generated videos. 

6w/ Both  

> Supervision
> w/ Structure
> Supervision
> w/o Any
> Supervision
> w/ ID
> Supervision
> Reference Image Generated Video

Figure 9. Qualitative Ablation Comparison Results. Our structure representation alignment supervision enables the model to produce stable human structures, while ID representation alignment supervision enhances character consistency in generated videos. w/ Both  

> Supervision
> w/ Structure
> Supervision
> w/o Any
> Supervision
> w/ ID
> Supervision
> Reference Image Generated Video

Figure 10. Qualitative Ablation Comparison Results. Our structure representation alignment supervision enables the model to produce stable human structures, while ID representation alignment supervision enhances character consistency in generated videos. 

7