Title: Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07818v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:43:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding 

# Muyang Zheng 

University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA muyzheng@ucdavis.edu 

# Tong Zhou 

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Blacksburg, Virginia, USA 

# Geyang Wu 

University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA 

# Zihao Lin 

University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA 

# Haibo Wang 

University of California, Davis Davis, California, USA 

# Lifu Huang 

University of California, Davis Davis, Californianeu, USA lfuhuang@ucdavis.edu 

Figure 1: We introduce VideoGlitchBench , a comprehensive benchmark designed for open-ended video game glitch detection. 

## Abstract 

Open-ended video game glitch detection aims to identify glitches in gameplay videos, describe them in natural language, and localize when they occur. Unlike conventional game glitch understanding tasks which have largely been framed as image-level recognition or closed-form question answering, this task requires reasoning about game-specific dynamics such as mechanics, physics, render-ing, animation, and expected state transitions directly over contin-uous gameplay videos and distinguishing true glitches from un-usual but valid in-game events. To support this task, we introduce 

VideoGlitchBench , the first benchmark for open-ended video game glitch detection with temporal localization. VideoGlitch-Bench contains 5,238 gameplay videos from 120 games, each anno-tated with detailed glitch descriptions and precise temporal spans,  

> arXiv:2604.07818v1 [cs.MA] 9 Apr 2026 Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang

enabling unified evaluation of semantic understanding and tempo-ral grounding. We further propose GliDe , an agentic framework with three key components: a game-aware contextual memory for informed reasoning, a debate-based reflector for multi-perspective glitch detection and verification, and an event-level grounding module that recovers complete glitch intervals from fragmented temporal evidence. We also design a task-specific evaluation proto-col that jointly measures semantic fidelity and temporal accuracy. Experiments show that this task remains highly challenging for current multimodal models, while GliDe achieves substantially stronger performance than corresponding vanilla model baselines. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Multi-agent planning .

## Keywords 

Video understanding, Agentic AI, Video game glitch detection, Mul-timodal large language models 

## 1 Introduction 

Game glitches are unintended failures in gameplay, such as broken physics, rendering artifacts, animation errors, collision failures, or logic inconsistencies [ 18 , 38 ]. Detecting such glitches from game-play videos is an important capability for game quality assurance (QA) [ 33 ], where testers typically examine gameplay sessions to inspect suspicious behaviors and summarize the issue with detailed bug reports. Recent works have begun to explore game glitch under-standing through tasks such as image-level glitch detection [ 31 , 32 ], text-only bug reasoning [ 35 ], and closed-form (e.g., multiple-choice or yes/no) question answering over gameplay videos [ 6 , 7 ]. While these settings provide testbeds for studying glitch understanding, they address only restricted aspects of the problem and fall short of the richer contextual analysis in real-world gameplay-based QA. To close this gap, we propose open-ended video game glitch de-tection , a task in which a model must reason over raw gameplay videos, identify glitches in an open-ended manner, describe them in natural language, and temporally localize their occurrence as evidence for follow-up analysis. Compared with prior game glitch understanding tasks, this setting requires joint video understand-ing, game-aware reasoning, and temporal grounding in a unified framework. To support research on this problem, we introduce 

VideoGlitchBench , the first benchmark for open-ended video game glitch detection with temporal localization. VideoGlitch-Bench is constructed from community-reported gameplay videos in GamePhysics [ 34 ] through careful game category-based selec-tion, filtering, and a semi-automated annotation pipeline, where GPT-4o [ 14 ] generates initial glitch descriptions from short video segments with Reddit discussion context, followed by human re-view and manual start–end timestamp annotation, yielding 5,238 high-quality, temporally grounded glitch descriptions for 120 games spanning diverse genres and glitch phenomena. Distinct from previous benchmarks for video understanding or video anomaly detection [ 22 , 24 , 29 , 30 , 39 ], which mainly focus on identifying specific events in real-world scenes such as surveillance, traffic, or industrial monitoring, VideoGlitchBench reveals two unique and critical challenges. First , a model must distinguish genuine glitches from behaviors that may appear abnormal visually but are actually consistent with the game’s design, mechanics, and world logic. This requires understanding not only the visual scene itself, but also the behaviors of characters and objects, the ongoing gameplay context, and the broader game background. For example, an object such as “ a boat flying through the sky ” may indicate a physics failure in one game, but could be a perfectly valid event in another game with stylized or fantastical mechanics. Second ,glitches exhibit diverse temporal patterns: some occur only briefly, while others persist over extended periods, and the same underlying glitch may reappear multiple times in a video with gaps in between. A model must therefore not only detect local failure evidence, but also determine when temporally separated observations should be linked to the same glitch event. Figure 1 shows typical examples in 

VideoGlitchBench , including single glitch, repeated occurrences of the same glitch, and multiple glitches within one video. To address these challenges, we propose GliDe , an agentic framework for open-ended video G ame g LI tch DE tection with tem-poral localization. The design of GliDe is directly motivated by the structure of the task. To determine whether a suspicious event is truly a glitch in a particular game context, GliDe first builds a game-aware contextual memory that incrementally accumulates cues about the scene, activities, interactions, and local gameplay dynamics, thereby providing a stronger prior for later judgments. To reduce false positives caused by visually unusual yet valid game-play behaviors, GliDe then performs multi-step verification through adaptive tool use and a debate-based reflector, encouraging the model to compare a glitch hypothesis against plausible in-game explanations before reaching a decision. Finally, to handle glitches that are short-lived, long-lasting, or intermittently recurring, GliDe 

includes an event-level grounding module that consolidates frag-mented evidence across windows and recovers complete glitch intervals, including multiple disjoint occurrences of the same glitch. We also design a new evaluation protocol to match and compare a set of system-generated, temporally grounded glitch descriptions against the ground-truth annotations for each video, by jointly assessing their semantic matching through LLM-based scoring and temporal grounding using temporal IoU. Extensive experiments show that VideoGlitchBench is highly challenging for current video understanding models. Even strong proprietary models such as gemini-2.0-flash [ 11 ] and claude-3.5-haiku [ 1 ] achieve limited performance, with the best baseline reaching only 26.01% F1 and 0.47 mIoU, while the best vanilla open-source model achieves 21.62% F1 and the average F1 across six open-source backbones is only 14.47%, highlighting the difficulty of jointly producing accurate open-ended glitch descriptions and precise temporal localization. In contrast, GliDe consistently improves both semantic understanding and grounding across all evaluated backbones: averaged over six open-source models, it raises F1 from 14.47% to 36.05% and mIoU from 0.28 to 0.51, and all GliDe -enhanced models outperform the reported proprietary baselines on the overall metrics. These results demonstrate both the difficulty of VideoGlitchBench and the effectiveness of GliDe as a unified solution for context-aware, temporally grounded glitch detection. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: (1) We in-troduce VideoGlitchBench , the first benchmark for open-ended video game glitch detection with temporal localization, featuring Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding Preprint, 2026, Under review 

Table 1: Comparison between VideoGlitchBench and existing game glitch datasets.                                       

> Dataset Scale Pipeline Annotation Localization Evaluation
> GamePhysics [34] 26,954 videos Semi-Auto Game name/weak metadata %Retrieval relevance GameBugDescriptions [35] 167 videos Manual Event description & Bug type %Multiple-choice accuracy GlitchBench [32] 923 images Manual Short glitch description %Description quality VideoGameBunny [31] 185,259 images Semi-Auto Caption & Image-to-JSON & Question-answer pairs
> %N/A (Designed for instruction-tuning) GameBench [7] 880 videos Semi-Auto Multiple-choice questions %Multiple-choice accuracy PhysGame [7] 38,957 videos Semi-Auto Question-answer pairs %N/A (Designed for instruction-tuning)
> VideoGlitchBench 5,238 videos Semi-Auto Detailed glitch description & start/end timestamps
> "Description quality & grounding accuracy

5,238 gameplay videos across 120 games with detailed descriptions and precise timestamps. (2) We propose GliDe , an agentic frame-work that tackles glitch detection challenges through a game-aware contextual memory, a debate-based verification mechanism, and an event-level grounding module to consolidate fragmented glitch intervals. (3) We design a comprehensive evaluation protocol that jointly assesses semantic fidelity and temporal localization. Exten-sive experiments demonstrate that GliDe significantly outperforms competitive baselines on this challenging benchmark. 

## 2 Related Work 

Game Glitch Understanding Benchmarks. GamePhysics [ 34 ]introduced the first large-scale dataset of gameplay videos, contain-ing more than 26,000 videos from over 1,800 games. Building on this, more recent research has shifted toward constructing special-ized benchmarks for evaluating multimodal large language models (MLLMs) on glitch understanding tasks. GlitchBench [ 32 ] evaluates MLLMs on recognizing unusual gameplay scenarios, focusing on single-frame visual glitch detection. GameBugDescriptions [ 35 ]tests zero-shot bug detection via multiple-choice questions based on text descriptions, while GameBench [ 7] uses expert-annotated gameplay videos paired with multiple-choice questions to assess vi-sual physical reasoning capabilities. To train these capabilities, Phys-Game [ 7] provides a large-scale video instruction dataset of over 140,000 QA pairs designed to enhance physical world understand-ing. However, restricted to image-level detection or multiple-choice QA formats without temporal localization, these benchmarks fail to reflect the practical demands of game QA. Addressing this gap, 

VideoGlitchBench targets open-ended glitch detection directly from raw videos, providing both natural language descriptions and precise timestamps. Table 1 summarizes these key differences. 

Game Glitch Detection Methods. Existing methods for game-play glitch detection have largely been shaped by the scope of previous benchmarks, and thus mainly operate through retrieval, question answering, or direct single-pass prediction. For exam-ple, GamePhysics [ 34 ] employs a CLIP-based retrieval approach to identify bug-related gameplay clips from textual queries, demon-strating that pretrained vision–language models can capture useful signals for glitch-related events. VideoGameBunny [ 31 ] introduces a game-oriented multimodal assistant trained on large-scale game-play instruction data, while PhysVLM [ 6 ] enhances video language models with physical commonsense supervision to better detect violations of physics rules in gameplay videos. They are effective for matching predefined queries or selecting from limited answer spaces, but are insufficient for open-ended glitch detection, where models must reason over and identify genuine glitches directly from raw videos with precise temporal localization. 

Agentic Frameworks for Video Understanding. For complex tasks requiring selective search and temporal grounding, agentic pipelines are increasingly replacing single-pass predictions [ 36 ]. Systems like VideoAgent [ 37 ], TraveLER [ 28 ], and VideoMind [ 21 ]successfully leverage iterative planning, modular tools, and evi-dence collection to enhance video QA. Concurrently, in the gaming domain, automated testing agents [ 43 ] utilizing reinforcement learn-ing [ 2, 4] and exploration systems (e.g., CCPT [ 27 ], Inspector [ 19 ]) are widely deployed to uncover bugs. However, these game agents focus strictly on active, interactive environment exploration, leav-ing a crucial gap for agentic frameworks designed to detect and temporally localize glitches from recorded gameplay videos. 

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to identify events de-viating from normal patterns, traditionally focusing on intelligent surveillance [ 29 ]. While early methods relied on deep neural net-works to model normality and detect deviations [ 10 , 12 , 20 , 29 ], recent MLLM-based approaches have shifted towards semantic rea-soning over abnormal events [ 24 ]. Representative methods such as Holmes-VAD [ 45 ] and AnomalyRuler [ 42 ] use multimodal in-struction tuning or rule-based reasoning to localize and explain anomalies, while LAVAD [ 44 ] and PLOVAD [ 40 ] further leverage captioning, prompting, and video-language interaction for anomaly detection. However, unlike real-world VAD which typically detects unusual human behaviors, anomalies in gameplay videos stem from violations of game mechanics, physics simulations, or render-ing pipelines [ 13 , 41 ]. Consequently, video game glitch detection fundamentally differs from conventional VAD, requiring explicit reasoning over game-specific rules and virtual-world dynamics. 

## 3 VideoGlitchBench 

Figure 2 illustrates the annotation pipeline of VideoGlitch-Bench , which comprises 3 main stages: source video selection, pseudo glitch description generation, and human validation & tem-poral grounding. We also provide detailed statistics in Table 2. Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang 

Figure 2: The annotation pipeline of our benchmark VideoGlitchBench .Table 2: Key statistics of VideoGlitchBench .       

> Statistics of VideoGlitchBench Value
> Total number of videos 5238 Game genres/subgenres 6 / 21 #Bugs in a single video (avg/max) 1.03 / 6 Video length (seconds, avg/max) 19.11 / 60.00 Bug description length (tokens, avg/max) 35.94 / 164

## 3.1 Selection of Source Videos 

Our dataset is built upon GamePhysics [ 34 ], a large-scale collection of 26,954 gameplay videos from the GamePhysics subreddit 1 , where players frequently share community-reported glitches and unusual in-game events. GamePhysics provides the raw videos together with basic metadata, including game title (e.g., Cyberpunk 2077 )and Reddit submission ID in filename. However, it was originally designed as a retrieval-oriented resource rather than a benchmark for open-ended glitch detection, so it does not provide verified glitch annotations, fine-grained natural-language glitch descrip-tions, or temporal boundaries indicating when a glitch occurs in the video. We therefore use it as the source video pool and further an-notate open-ended glitch descriptions and timestamps to construct 

VideoGlitchBench . Although GamePhysics covers 1,873 unique games, many are represented by only one or two candidate videos without clear or confirmed glitches. To ensure sufficient coverage for reliable annotation and evaluation, we retain only games with at least ten candidate videos, yielding a final pool of 120 games. Among these 120 games, the number of candidate videos varies, with some games contributing far more videos than others. To promote a balanced distribution of game types in VideoGlitch-Bench , we first construct a taxonomy of genres and subgenres based on standard definitions from Wikipedia 2 and then use GPT-4o-mini [ 14 ] to assign each game title to the corresponding pre-defined categories. The detailed taxonomy is provided in Appen-dix A.1. Based on this taxonomy, we sample videos in a genre-aware manner, prioritizing underrepresented subgenres and games with fewer available videos. This sampling strategy improves diversity across genres, subgenres, and individual games, while reducing over-representation from a small number of dominant categories. As a result, we sample 5,238 gameplay videos spanning 120 games. 

> 1https://www.reddit.com/r/GamePhysics/
> 2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_game

## 3.2 Semi-Automated Annotation Pipeline 

Since purely manual annotation of fine-grained, temporally grounded glitches is prohibitively expensive at scale, we introduce a semi-automated pipeline. This approach synergizes MLLM-based video understanding with rigorous human validation to ensure both effi-ciency and high data quality. 

Automated generation of pseudo descriptions. To reduce the annotation burden, we employ GPT-4o [ 14 ] to generate pseudo glitch descriptions for each selected video. Because processing full-length gameplay videos can degrade the model’s understanding, we partition each video into short segments ( < 10 seconds) and sample frames at 2 FPS, restricting the input to fewer than 20 frames per segment. To enhance generation quality, we augment the visual input with the original Reddit discussion context (i.e., post title and comments), retrieved via PRAW [ 5] using the submission ID embedded in each source filename. This supplementary metadata serves as a strong semantic prior, enabling the model to produce highly informative and accurate pseudo descriptions. An example of the model input and output is provided in Appendix A.2. 

Human validation and temporal grounding. As MLLM-generated descriptions may omit critical details, misidentify game entities, or provide inaccurate event boundaries, all pseudo descrip-tions undergo rigorous human verification. To support efficient and scalable annotation, we develop a multi-user annotation interface that allows multiple annotators to inspect videos simultaneously. Annotators verify each MLLM-generated description and revise it when necessary, such as correcting factual errors, adding missing details, or refining references to game characters and objects. They also manually annotate the exact start and end timestamps of each glitch event within the interface, producing the precise tem-poral boundaries needed for temporal localization and grounding tasks. Since the pseudo descriptions are generated from short video segments, the intermediate annotations are initially segment-level. During human validation, annotators review the full video together with all segment-level pseudo descriptions, and manually merge those referring to the same underlying glitch into a unified video-level glitch annotation. If a glitch spans multiple adjacent segments or appears in multiple disjoint segments, annotators consolidate these observations into one glitch report and assign the correspond-ing temporal intervals at the video level. Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding Preprint, 2026, Under review 

Figure 3: Illustration of our GliDe framework. 

## 4 Methodology 4.1 Problem Formulation 

Given an input gameplay video 𝑉 , the goal of open-ended video game glitch detection is to identify all glitch events that occur in the video, generate a natural-language description for each event, and localize its temporal extent. We formulate this task as a structured set prediction problem, where each glitch report is represented as a pair (𝑑,𝑇 ), with 𝑑 denotes a free-form glitch description and 𝑇 

denotes its temporal span. Since the same glitch may recur multiple times throughout a video with gaps in between, 𝑇 may consist of one or more disjoint intervals. For each video, the ground-truth annotations are defined as a set of such reports 𝑌 = {( 𝑑 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 ,𝑇 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 )} 𝑀 𝑗 =1,and the model is required to predict a set of the same form ˆ𝑌 =

{( 𝑑 𝑝 𝑖 ,𝑇 𝑝 𝑖 )} 𝑁 𝑖 =1, where 𝑀 and 𝑁 are the numbers of ground-truth and predicted glitch reports, respectively. 

## 4.2 The GliDe Framework 

We propose GliDe , an agentic framework for open-ended video game glitch detection with temporal localization. The task is chal-lenging for three main reasons. First , determining whether an unusual event is truly a glitch often requires accumulated game-play context over time, rather than inspection of a single suspi-cious frame. Second , gameplay videos frequently contain rare yet valid in-game behaviors, such as abrupt camera shifts, exagger-ated character poses during scripted animations, or sudden object movements caused by normal game mechanics; as a result, one-pass judgments are prone to false positives. Third , a real glitch may span multiple temporal windows or reappear intermittently, so local window-level detections can be fragmented and must be consolidated into complete event-level glitch intervals. To address these challenges, GliDe is built around three core designs: a lightweight game-aware memory for preserving global gameplay context, a debate-based verification mechanism for distinguishing true glitches from unusual but valid behaviors, and an event-level grounding strategy for merging fragmented evi-dence into complete glitch events. These designs are instantiated in a five-stage pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 3. 

4.2.1 Preprocessing. Given an input gameplay video 𝑉 sampled at 

𝜏 FPS, we partition it into non-overlapping 𝑘 -frame windows. The frames within each window are spatially stitched into a composite image, yielding a sequence of stitched windows W = {𝑤 𝑗 }𝐿 𝑗 =1,where 𝑤 𝑗 denotes the 𝑗 -th window and 𝐿 is the total number of windows. This step efficiently preserves short-range temporal cues while minimizing MLLM calls for subsequent multi-step reasoning. 

4.2.2 Initial Glitch Detection with Game-aware Memory. GliDe 

starts with a Scanner that processes each stitched window 𝑤 𝑗 ∈ W 

in a single pass. For each window, the Scanner predicts: 

( ˆ𝑦 𝑗 , 𝑐 𝑗 , 𝑠 𝑗 , 𝑞 𝑗 ) = 𝐹 scan (𝑤 𝑗 ),

where ˆ𝑦 𝑗 ∈ { 0, 1} indicates whether the window contains a poten-tial glitch, 𝑐 𝑗 denotes a coarse glitch category (e.g., visual, physics, or game logic), 𝑠 𝑗 is a natural-language summary of the current gameplay context (e.g., scene type, visible entities, and ongoing behaviors), and 𝑞 𝑗 ∈ [ 0, 1] is the confidence score. The binary predictions ˆ𝑦 𝑗 are first used to filter out clearly normal windows and retain only a small set of candidate windows for deeper analysis. More importantly, the context descriptions {𝑠 𝑗 }𝐿 𝑗 =1

are aggregated into a compact game-aware memory . Specifically, we apply an LLM-based summarization function over the window-level context descriptions to obtain a global summary context: 

𝑀 = 𝐺 ({ 𝑠 𝑗 }𝐿 𝑗 =1),

where 𝑀 captures the overall gameplay scene, active entities, and ongoing dynamics in the video. This memory serves as a video-level contextual prior for downstream reasoning. Instead of judging each Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang 

suspicious window in isolation, GliDe can compare local anom-alies against the broader gameplay context, which helps determine whether an unusual event is actually inconsistent with the game state or simply part of normal gameplay. 

4.2.3 Fine-grained Verification via Debate-based Reasoning. After initial glitch detection, each candidate window 𝑤 𝑗 is further exam-ined through a verification loop involving: a Planner , an Executor ,and a Reflector . This stage will gather targeted evidence and de-termine whether the candidate truly corresponds to a glitch. At verification step 𝑡 , the Planner takes as input the current candidate window 𝑤 𝑗 , the Scanner’s initial hypothesis, the game-aware memory 𝑀 , and the cumulative investigation memory 𝐼 𝑗,𝑡 −1.It then selects the next action according to a planning policy 𝜋 :

𝑎 𝑗,𝑡 = 𝜋 (𝑤 𝑗 , 𝑀, 𝐼 𝑗,𝑡 −1),

where 𝑎 𝑗,𝑡 specifies both the tool to invoke and its associated argu-ments. The available tools include: VQA , which asks targeted visual questions about the stitched window based on the current glitch hypothesis and the missing evidence needed for verification (e.g., “How does the robotic arm interact with the wall and floor structures between frames #24 and #31? ”); Zoom-in , which selects a local im-age region for magnified inspection; and Object Tracking , which provides a short target description and invokes a segmentation-based tracker (SAM3 [ 8 ]) to obtain motion evidence. The Executor applies 𝑎 𝑗,𝑡 and returns a new observation 𝑜 𝑗,𝑡 , which is then ap-pended to the investigation memory. After each tool execution, the resulting observation is evalu-ated by the Reflector through a structured debate among three roles: an Advocate (game QA tester), a Skeptic (game designer), and a Judge (tech lead). The Advocate argues that the observed phenomenon is a genuine glitch, while the Skeptic proposes plau-sible in-game explanations or highlights missing evidence. The Judge then arbitrates between the two sides and produces a bi-nary verdict: 𝑣 𝑗,𝑡 ∈ { glitch , normal }, together with a confidence score 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑗,𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1]. This debate-based verification is a core de-sign of GliDe . Rather than merely re-checking a prediction, it explicitly contrasts a glitch hypothesis against alternative expla-nations grounded in normal gameplay behavior. This matters be-cause unusual motions or visual effects may still be valid under the game rules, such as exaggerated character poses during specific animations or abrupt object movements triggered by normal game mechanics. By forcing the system to reason over competing inter-pretations before making a decision, GliDe reduces false positives and improves verification reliability. The verification loop terminates when the Judge outputs a verdict with confidence above a threshold 𝜏 , or when the maximum number of steps 𝑇 max is reached: 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑗,𝑡 ≥ 𝜏 or 𝑡 = 𝑇 max . The final verified result for window 𝑤 𝑗 is then forwarded to the next stage. 

4.2.4 Event-level Grounding. The verification stage operates at the window level, whereas the target output requires event-level glitch reports with complete temporal spans. To bridge this gap, GliDe 

includes an event-level Grounder that consolidates fragmented window evidence into coherent glitch events. The Grounder proceeds in two steps. First, it performs seman-tic clustering over the verified glitch windows. For each pair of verified windows, an LLM judges whether their descriptions refer to the same underlying glitch phenomenon. Windows deemed se-mantically consistent are grouped into the same event cluster. This allows the framework to handle cases where the same glitch appears across non-consecutive portions of the video. Second, for each event cluster, GliDe performs bidirectional temporal propagation to refine the event boundaries. Starting from the initially detected windows, the model iteratively checks neighboring windows in both temporal directions and extends the boundaries whenever the same glitch remains visible. In this way, the Grounder can recover the full temporal extent of a glitch even when the initial detector only captures its most salient moments. 

4.2.5 Structured Report Generation. Finally, GliDe converts the grounded event clusters into the output set ˆ𝑌 . Since a single game-play video may contain multiple distinct glitches, the framework generates a set of structured reports rather than a single prediction. For each cluster, it summarizes the accumulated multi-window evi-dence into a single coherent description and converts the refined frame ranges into timestamp intervals in seconds. The final output is therefore a structured glitch report containing natural-language description together with one or more temporal spans. 

## 5 Experiments 5.1 Experimental Setup 

We evaluate a diverse set of multimodal models, including both proprietary and open-source backbones. The proprietary models are gemini-2.0-flash [ 11 ], gpt-4o-mini [ 14 ], claude-3.5-haiku [ 1], and nova-lite-v1 [ 15 ]. The open-source models are Qwen2.5-VL-3B/7B-Instruct [ 3], InternVL2.5-4B/8B [ 9], UI-TARS-1.5-7B [ 26 ], and LLaVA-OneVision-7B [ 17 ]. Our GliDe framework comparison is conducted on open-source models, while proprietary models are included as reference baselines. Videos are uniformly sampled at 4 FPS and divided into non-overlapping windows of 8 frames. The frames within each window are spatially stitched into a single composite image before being fed into the model. All experiments are run on four NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000 GPUs (48GB). Please refer to Appendix B.1 for detailed experiment and evaluation setup. 

## 5.2 Evaluation Protocol 

Open-ended video game glitch detection requires evaluating both semantic correctness and temporal localization. Since prior game glitch benchmarks mainly focus on multiple-choice accuracy or description-only quality, we design a task-specific evaluation pro-tocol by building on SODA [ 23 ] and adapting it to our setting. For one video, let the predicted set be ˆ𝑌 = {( 𝑑 𝑝 𝑖 ,𝑇 𝑝 𝑖 )} 𝑁 𝑖 =1 and the ground-truth set be 𝑌 = {( 𝑑 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 ,𝑇 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 )} 𝑀 𝑗 =1.

Stage 1: LLM-as-Judge Semantic Scoring. For each prediction– ground-truth pair, we use an LLM judge to score the semantic similarity between the predicted description 𝑑 𝑝 𝑖 and the ground-truth description 𝑑 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 , denoted as 𝑆 LLM (𝑑 𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 ) ∈ [ 0, 5], where a higher score indicates better semantic alignment. 

Stage 2: LLM-Weighted IoU Computation. To support reliable matching, we combine semantic similarity and temporal overlap into a joint score, 𝑊 𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑆 LLM (𝑑 𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 ) · IoU (𝑇 𝑝 𝑖 ,𝑇 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 ). This score is high only when a prediction matches a ground-truth glitch in both description and temporal span. Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding Preprint, 2026, Under review 

Table 3: Comparison of vanilla models and GliDe -enhanced models on VideoGlitchBench across description generation, temporal grounding, and overall performance. 

Model Description Generation Temporal Grounding Overall Precision (%) Recall (%) F1 (%) mIoU F1 × IoU (%) Proprietary Models 

gemini-2.0-flash [11] 18.36 25.35 21.29 0.44 10.55 gpt-4o-mini [14] 12.33 32.36 17.86 0.35 6.20 claude-3.5-haiku [1] 21.66 32.54 26.01 0.47 12.91 nova-lite-v1 [15] 6.66 23.77 10.41 0.28 2.98 

Open-source Models 

Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct [3] 11.08 26.53 15.63 0.31 4.81 

+GliDe 32.36 (+21.28) 39.38 (+12.85) 35.52 (+19.89) 0.48 (+0.17) 17.29 (+12.48) Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct [3] 10.41 14.74 12.20 0.30 4.11 

+GliDe 34.55 (+24.14) 45.09 (+30.35) 39.12 (+26.92) 0.53 (+0.23) 19.46 (+15.35) InternVL2.5-4B [9] 8.62 22.93 12.53 0.18 1.92 

+GliDe 29.15 (+20.53) 36.87 (+13.94) 32.56 (+20.03) 0.52 (+0.34) 15.27 (+13.35) InternVL2.5-8B [9] 11.90 23.36 15.77 0.25 4.06 

+GliDe 32.64 (+20.74) 40.97 (+17.61) 36.33 (+20.56) 0.50 (+0.25) 17.04 (+12.98) UI-TARS-1.5-7B [26] 19.08 24.93 21.62 0.40 9.11 

+GliDe 34.31 (+15.23) 49.28 (+24.35) 40.45 (+18.83) 0.51 (+0.11) 17.02 (+7.91) LLaVA-OneVision-7B [17] 5.90 19.50 9.06 0.26 2.18 

+GliDe 30.13 (+24.23) 34.85 (+15.35) 32.32 (+23.26) 0.50 (+0.24) 16.24 (+14.06) 

Table 4: Ablation study on the game-aware memory and debate-based verification mechanism. 

Variant Precision (%) Recall (%) F1 (%) 

GliDe 34.55 45.09 39.12 w/o Game-aware memory 30.65 35.80 33.03 w/o Debate-based verification 28.94 36.21 32.17 

Stage 3: Matching. Given the pairwise score matrix 𝑊 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑀 ,we perform global one-to-one matching with the Hungarian algo-rithm [16]. Let the matched pairs be denoted by A = {( 𝑖, 𝑗 )} .

Stage 4: Final Metrics Computation. Based on A, we report three groups of metrics as follows. 

Description generation. We first measure semantic quality inde-pendently. Precision is 𝑃 desc = Í(𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ A 𝑆 LLM (𝑑 𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 )/ 𝑁 , and recall is 𝑅 desc = Í(𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ A 𝑆 LLM (𝑑 𝑝 𝑖 , 𝑑 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 )/ 𝑀 . Their harmonic mean [ 25 ] is reported as 𝐹 1desc .

Temporal Grounding. We use the mean IoU over matched pairs, defined as mIoU = Í(𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ A IoU (𝑇 𝑝 𝑖 ,𝑇 𝑔𝑡 𝑗 )/|A| .

Overall Performance. Finally, we evaluate semantic correctness and temporal localization jointly. We compute Precision as 𝑃 overall =

Í(𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ A 𝑊 𝑖,𝑗 /𝑁 and recall as 𝑅 overall = Í(𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈ A 𝑊 𝑖,𝑗 /𝑀 , and report their harmonic mean as 𝐹 1 × IoU .

## 5.3 Main Results 

Table 3 reports the main evaluation results on VideoGlitchBench .From these results, we summarize the following observations. 

Current models still struggle on open-ended video game glitch detection. Even strong multimodal models achieve only limited performance on this task. For proprietary baselines, the best 

Table 5: Ablation study on the event-level grounding strategy across different open-source backbones (mIoU). 

Backbone GliDe w/o Event-level grounding 

Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct 0.53 0.32 InternVL2.5-8B 0.50 0.24 UI-TARS-1.5-7B 0.51 0.36 

F1 is only 26.01% (claude-3.5-haiku), with an mIoU of 0.47. For open-source baselines, the best F1 is 21.62% (UI-TARS-1.5-7B), and the average F1 across all six open-source models is only 14.47%, with an average mIoU of 0.28. These results suggest that VideoGlitch-Bench remains highly challenging for current MLLMs, especially when models must both describe glitches in open-ended language and localize them precisely in time. 

GliDe consistently improves both description generation and temporal grounding. After applying GliDe , all six open-source backbones show clear gains on all major metrics. Averaged over six open-source models, F1 improves from 14.47% to 36.05% (+21.58%), while mIoU improves from 0.28 to 0.51 (+0.23). The overall F1 ×IoU score also rises from 4.37% to 17.05% on average, indicating that the improvements are not limited to one aspect of the task. Notably, after applying GliDe , all open-source models achieve higher F1, mIoU and F1 ×IoU scores than the proprietary baselines reported in Table 3. This shows that the proposed framework brings robust improvements across different model families and improves both semantic accuracy and temporal completeness. 

Case analysis. We present two examples to illustrate the two core challenges of VideoGlitchBench . The first case, shown in Figure 4, highlights the difficulty of distinguishing genuine glitches Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang 

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison between the vanilla model and GliDe on a Human: Fall Flat gameplay clip. 

Figure 5: Qualitative comparison between the vanilla model and GliDe on a ARK: Survival Evolved gameplay clip. 

from visually unusual but valid in-game behaviors. In Human: Fall Flat , the vanilla model is distracted by the game’s exaggerated and floppy character motions, falsely identifying twisted limbs and brief apparent floating as glitches, while missing the actual anomaly in the final segment. In contrast, GliDe focuses on the true crane-related failure, producing a prediction that is much closer to the ground truth. The second case in Figure 5 highlights the temporal challenge of fragmented and repeated glitches. In ARK: Survival Evolved , the same black model anomaly appears in two disjoint intervals. The vanilla model detects the two segments separately and fails to associate them as one glitch event. By contrast, GliDe 

links the repeated observations through semantically consistent evidence and produces a single coherent glitch report with multi-ple temporal spans. These cases show that GliDe improves both context-aware verification and event-level temporal grounding. 

## 5.4 Ablation Studies 

We conduct ablation studies on the three key designs in GliDe :game-aware memory, debate-based verification mechanism, and event-level grounding strategy, as shown in Tables 4 and 5. Table 4 reports the ablation results on Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct. In particular, removing Game context reduces F1 from 39.12% to 33.03%, showing that game-aware memory help the model better understand ongoing gameplay and recognize valid glitches. Remov-ing debate-based verification mechanism causes a further drop in 

Figure 6: Hyperparameter sensitivity study. 

precision, from 34.55% to 28.94%, indicating that the debate mecha-nism is especially useful for filtering unreliable glitch predictions and reducing false positives. Table 5 shows that the event-level grounding strategy consis-tently improves temporal localization accuracy across three open-source models. After removing this strategy, mIoU drops signifi-cantly across all backbones, indicating that event-level grounding is essential for recovering accurate glitch intervals. This is partic-ularly important in our setting, where a single glitch may span multiple windows or reappear across disjoint time intervals. Furthermore, we conduct a hyperparameter sensitivity study on FPS and window size (on Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct). Figure 6 shows that GliDe remains relatively stable across different settings, Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding Preprint, 2026, Under review 

while moderate temporal granularity generally gives slightly better results. The best performance is obtained at 4 FPS with a window size of 8, suggesting that this combination provides a good balance between temporal detail and contextual coverage. When the FPS is too low, short glitch evidence may be missed, while overly large window sizes can dilute local glitch signals and make reasoning less focused. These results support the default preprocessing choice used in our experiments. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce VideoGlitchBench , a benchmark for open-ended video game glitch detection with temporal grounding. We also propose GliDe , an agentic framework designed for this task. 

VideoGlitchBench requires models to detect glitches from raw gameplay videos, describe them in natural language, and localize when they occur. To address this challenge, GliDe combines game-aware context, debate-based verification, and event-level grounding. Experiments show that current multimodal models still struggle on this task, while GliDe improves both description quality and tem-poral localization. We hope this work can support future research on game video understanding and agentic multimodal reasoning. 

## References 

[1] Anthropic. 2024. Model Card Addendum: Claude 3.5 Haiku and Upgraded Claude 3.5 Sonnet. https://assets.anthropic.com/m/1cd9d098ac3e6467/original/Claude-3-Model-Card-October-Addendum.pdf. [2] Sinan Ariyurek, Aysu Betin-Can, and Elif Surer. 2019. Automated video game testing using synthetic and humanlike agents. IEEE Transactions on Games 13, 1 (2019), 50–67. [3] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhaohai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, Jiabo Ye, Xi Zhang, Tianbao Xie, Zesen Cheng, Hang Zhang, Zhibo Yang, Haiyang Xu, and Junyang Lin. 2025. Qwen2.5-VL Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 (2025). [4] Joakim Bergdahl, Camilo Gordillo, Konrad Tollmar, and Linus Gisslén. 2020. Augmenting automated game testing with deep reinforcement learning. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG) . IEEE, 600–603. [5] Bryce Boe. 2023. PRAW: The Python Reddit API Wrapper Documentation. https: //praw.readthedocs.io/. [6] Meng Cao, Haoran Tang, Haoze Zhao, Hangyu Guo, Jiaheng Liu, Ge Zhang, Ruyang Liu, Qiang Sun, Ian Reid, and Xiaodan Liang. 2024. Physgame: Un-covering physical commonsense violations in gameplay videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01800 (2024). [7] Meng Cao, Haoran Tang, Haoze Zhao, Mingfei Han, Ruyang Liu, Qiang Sun, Xiao-jun Chang, Ian Reid, and Xiaodan Liang. 2026. Order from Chaos: Physical World Understanding from Glitchy Gameplay Videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16471 

(2026). [8] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, An-drew Huang, et al . 2025. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 (2025). [9] Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Jinguo Zhu, Shenglong Ye, Hao Tian, Zhaoyang Liu, et al . 2024. Expanding Performance Boundaries of Open-Source Multimodal Models with Model, Data, and Test-Time Scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05271 (2024). [10] Dong Gong, Lingqiao Liu, Vuong Le, Budhaditya Saha, Moussa Reda Mansour, Svetha Venkatesh, and Anton van den Hengel. 2019. Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory-augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 1705–1714. [11] Google. 2024. Introducing Gemini 2.0: our new AI model for the agen-tic era. https://blog.google/innovation-and-ai/models-and-research/google-deepmind/google-gemini-ai-update-december-2024/. [12] Mahmudul Hasan, Jonghyun Choi, Jan Neumann, Amit K Roy-Chowdhury, and Larry S Davis. 2016. Learning temporal regularity in video sequences. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 733–742. [13] Sihao Hu, Tiansheng Huang, Gaowen Liu, Ramana Rao Kompella, Fatih Ilhan, Selim Furkan Tekin, Yichang Xu, Zachary Yahn, and Ling Liu. 2024. A survey on large language model-based game agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02039 (2024). [14] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al . 2024. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 (2024). [15] Amazon Artificial General Intelligence. 2024. The Amazon Nova Family of Models: Technical Report and Model Card. https://www.amazon.science/publications/the-amazon-nova-family-of-models-technical-report-and-model-card. [16] Harold W Kuhn. 1955. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics quarterly 2, 1-2 (1955), 83–97. [17] Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, and Chunyuan Li. 2024. LLaVA-OneVision: Easy Visual Task Transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326 (2024). [18] Dayi Lin, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2019. Identifying gameplay videos that exhibit bugs in computer games. Empirical Software Engineering 24, 6 (2019), 4006–4033. [19] Guoqing Liu, Mengzhang Cai, Li Zhao, Tao Qin, Adrian Brown, Jimmy Bischoff, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2022. Inspector: Pixel-based automated game testing via ex-ploration, detection, and investigation. In 2022 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG) .IEEE, 237–244. [20] Wen Liu, Weixin Luo, Dongze Lian, and Shenghua Gao. 2018. Future frame prediction for anomaly detection–a new baseline. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 6536–6545. [21] Ye Liu, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Chang Wen Chen, and Mike Zheng Shou. [n. d.]. VideoMind: A Chain-of-LoRA Agent for Temporal-Grounded Video Reasoning. In NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on Bridging Language, Agent, and World Models for Reasoning and Planning .[22] Weixin Luo, Wen Liu, and Shenghua Gao. 2017. A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly detection in stacked rnn framework. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision . 341–349. [23] Iqra Qasim, Alexander Horsch, and Dilip Prasad. 2025. Dense video captioning: A survey of techniques, datasets and evaluation protocols. Comput. Surveys 57, 6 (2025), 1–36. [24] Bharathkumar Ramachandra, Michael J Jones, and Ranga Raju Vatsavai. 2020. A survey of single-scene video anomaly detection. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 44, 5 (2020), 2293–2312. [25] Hinrich Schütze, Christopher D Manning, and Prabhakar Raghavan. 2008. Intro-duction to information retrieval . Vol. 39. Cambridge University Press Cambridge. [26] ByteDance Seed. 2025. UI-TARS-1.5. https://seed-tars.com/1.5. [27] Alessandro Sestini, Linus Gisslén, Joakim Bergdahl, Konrad Tollmar, and An-drew David Bagdanov. 2022. Automated gameplay testing and validation with curiosity-conditioned proximal trajectories. IEEE Transactions on Games 16, 1 (2022), 113–126. [28] Chuyi Shang, Amos You, Sanjay Subramanian, Trevor Darrell, and Roei Herzig. 2024. TraveLER: A Modular Multi-LMM Agent Framework for Video Question-Answering. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 9740–9766. [29] Waqas Sultani, Chen Chen, and Mubarak Shah. 2018. Real-world anomaly de-tection in surveillance videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 6479–6488. [30] Waqas Sultani, Chen Chen, and Mubarak Shah. 2018. Real-world anomaly de-tection in surveillance videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 6479–6488. [31] Mohammad Reza Taesiri and Cor-Paul Bezemer. 2025. Videogamebunny: To-wards vision assistants for video games. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) . IEEE, 1403–1413. [32] Mohammad Reza Taesiri, Tianjun Feng, Cor-Paul Bezemer, and Anh Nguyen. 2024. GlitchBench: Can large multimodal models detect video game glitches?. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .22444–22455. [33] Mohammad Reza Taesiri, Abhijay Ghildyal, Saman Zadtootaghaj, Nabajeet Bar-man, and Cor-Paul Bezemer. [n. d.]. VideoGameQA-Bench: Evaluating Vision-Language Models for Video Game Quality Assurance. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .[34] Mohammad Reza Taesiri, Finlay Macklon, and Cor-Paul Bezemer. 2022. Clip meets gamephysics: Towards bug identification in gameplay videos using zero-shot transfer learning. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories . 270–281. [35] Mohammad Reza Taesiri, Finlay Macklon, Yihe Wang, Hengshuo Shen, and Cor-Paul Bezemer. 2022. Large language models are pretty good zero-shot video game bug detectors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02506 (2022). [36] Yunlong Tang, Jing Bi, Siting Xu, Luchuan Song, Susan Liang, Teng Wang, Daoan Zhang, Jie An, Jingyang Lin, Rongyi Zhu, et al . 2025. Video understanding with large language models: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology (2025). [37] Xiaohan Wang, Yuhui Zhang, Orr Zohar, and Serena Yeung-Levy. 2024. Videoa-gent: Long-form video understanding with large language model as agent. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 58–76. Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang                       

> [38] Benedict Wilkins and Kostas Stathis. 2022. Learning to identify perceptual bugs in 3d video games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12884 (2022). [39] Peng Wu, Jing Liu, Yujia Shi, Yujia Sun, Fangtao Shao, Zhaoyang Wu, and Zhiwei Yang. 2020. Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal violence detection under weak supervision. In European conference on computer vision . Springer, 322–339. [40] Chenting Xu, Ke Xu, Xinghao Jiang, and Tanfeng Sun. 2025. Plovad: Prompting vision-language models for open vocabulary video anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 35, 6 (2025), 5925–5938. [41] Xinrun Xu, Yuxin Wang, Chaoyi Xu, Ziluo Ding, Jiechuan Jiang, Zhiming Ding, and Börje F Karlsson. 2024. A survey on game playing agents and large models: Methods, applications, and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10249 (2024). [42] Yuchen Yang, Kwonjoon Lee, Behzad Dariush, Yinzhi Cao, and Shao-Yuan Lo. 2024. Follow the rules: reasoning for video anomaly detection with large language models. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 304–322. [43] Lance Ying, Katherine M Collins, Prafull Sharma, Cedric Colas, Kaiya Ivy Zhao, Adrian Weller, Zenna Tavares, Phillip Isola, Samuel J Gershman, Jacob D Andreas, et al .2025. Assessing adaptive world models in machines with novel games.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12821 (2025). [44] Luca Zanella, Willi Menapace, Massimiliano Mancini, Yiming Wang, and Elisa Ricci. 2024. Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 18527–18536. [45] Huaxin Zhang, Xiaohao Xu, Xiang Wang, Jialong Zuo, Chuchu Han, Xiaonan Huang, Changxin Gao, Yuehuan Wang, and Nong Sang. 2024. Holmes-vad: Towards unbiased and explainable video anomaly detection via multi-modal llm.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12235 (2024).

## A Details on VideoGlitchBench 

## A.1 Statistics 

To support a diverse and balanced benchmark, we organize the selected games in VideoGlitchBench into a taxonomy of genres and subgenres, as shown in Figure 7. Specifically, the benchmark covers six major genres: Action , Simulation , RPG , Strategy , Puzzle ,and Adventure . This taxonomy is used to guide genre-aware sam-pling, which helps reduce over-representation from a small number of dominant game types while improving coverage of underrepre-sented categories. 

Figure 7: Taxonomy of VideoGlitchBench .

Table 6 further shows the video distribution across genres and subgenres. Action games account for the largest portion of the benchmark, covering 3,834 videos (73.20%), with Action Adventure 

and Shooter as the two largest subgenres. Simulation is the second largest genre with 974 videos (18.59%), followed by RPG with 313 videos (5.98%). Smaller but still meaningful portions come from Strategy, Puzzle, and Adventure. This long-tail distribution reflects the natural composition of community-reported gameplay glitches, while our sampling strategy still preserves diversity across different gameplay styles and game mechanics. 

Table 6: Video distribution by genre and subgenre. 

Genre Subgenre Videos Share (%) 

Action 3834 73.20 

Action Adventure 1533 29.27 Shooter 1368 26.12 Survival 264 5.04 Fighting 260 4.96 Battle Royale 163 3.11 Stealth 133 2.54 Platform 71 1.36 Wargame 30 0.57 Rhythm 12 0.23 

Simulation 974 18.59 

Vehicle Simulation 510 9.74 Construction and Management 258 4.93 Sports 140 2.67 Life Simulation 66 1.26 

RPG 313 5.98 

Action RPG 264 5.04 Dungeon Crawl 20 0.38 MMORPG 19 0.36 Roguelike 10 0.19 

Strategy 60 1.15 

Real-time Tactics (RTT) 30 0.57 Turn-based Strategy 30 0.57 

Puzzle 47 0.90 

Puzzle 47 0.90 

Adventure 10 0.19 

Interactive Film 10 0.19 We also analyze the textual distribution of the annotated glitch descriptions. Figure 8 presents a word cloud over all bug descrip-tions after removing stopwords. Frequent terms such as physics ,

collision , animation , engine , vehicle , and character suggest that 

VideoGlitchBench covers a broad range of glitch types, including physics failures, rendering issues, animation errors, and unexpected object interactions. This observation is consistent with the goal of the benchmark: evaluating whether a model can understand and describe diverse glitch phenomena in open-ended gameplay videos. 

## A.2 More on Annotation 

Example of annotation process. Figure 9 shows a concrete exam-ple of our annotation process. The input video is first divided into short segments (< 10 seconds), and GPT-4o generates pseudo glitch Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding Preprint, 2026, Under review 

Table 7: Tool library for our agentic framework. Tool Name Description 

vqa Submit the full stitched window image with a text question to the VLM and return a free-form answer. 

zoom_in Crop a specified region from one or more raw frames, upscale the result, and chain a VQA call on the cropped output. Used when the anomaly occupies a small portion of the full image. 

object_tracking Track a specified object across frames using SAM3, then automatically run physics analysis on the resulting centroid sequence. Physics analysis computes per-frame velocity and acceleration, and applies four rule-based anomaly detectors: (1) position_jump : inter-frame displacement > 20% of the frame diagonal; (2) velocity_spike :inter-frame speed change > 500 px/s; (3) motion_freeze : displacement < 1 px for ≥ 4 consecutive frames; (4) jittering : direction reversals in ≥ 50% of consecutive frame-pair steps. 

Figure 8: Word cloud of all the bug descriptions. 

descriptions independently for each segment. In this example, both segments describe a similar phenomenon where a truck exhibits physically implausible flying behavior. During human validation, annotators recognize that these segment-level descriptions corre-spond to the same underlying glitch. They therefore merge them into a single video-level glitch report, refine the description for clarity and correctness, and assign unified temporal boundaries that span the full duration of the event. This example illustrates how fragmented segment-level predictions are consolidated into coherent, temporally grounded annotations in VideoGlitchBench .

Annotation interface. To support efficient and consistent anno-tation, we develop a multi-user annotation interface, as illustrated in Figure 10. The interface presents the gameplay video together with model-generated segment-level pseudo descriptions. For each video, annotators can review the playback, inspect segment-wise predic-tions with corresponding timestamps, and directly edit descriptions or assign temporal boundaries. The interface also provides sim-ple controls for adding, merging, or discarding glitch annotations, enabling streamlined video-level labeling. 

Annotator expertise. All annotations are conducted by volun-teers with prior experience in gaming and familiarity with common glitch phenomena, such as physics violations, rendering artifacts, and abnormal object interactions. While the annotators are not pro-fessional QA engineers, they possess sufficient domain knowledge to reliably identify and describe glitches in gameplay videos. To ensure annotation quality, all samples undergo careful review and refinement during the validation process. 

## B Experiment Details B.1 Full Experimental Setup 

Video preprocessing. Input videos are processed using time-based frame sampling via OpenCV, extracting frames at a fixed rate of 4 FPS (i.e., one frame every 0.25 seconds), regardless of the original video frame rate. This ensures uniform temporal coverage across videos with varying native frame rates. Extracted frames are or-ganized into non-overlapping windows of 8 frames each, yielding a temporal span of 2 seconds per window. Within each window, the 8 frames are stitched into a single composite image arranged in a 2-row × 4-column grid layout, with each frame labeled by its sequential index in the top-left corner. Stitched images are saved as JPEG. This multi-frame stitching design allows the model to observe temporal progression within a single model call. 

Rough detection. The Scanner is configured with a sampling temperature of 0.5 and a maximum output length of 512 tokens. In addition to the glitch label and confidence score, the Scanner produces a game_context field — a 2–4 sentence natural language description of the game genre, environment, and visible mechanics, which is propagated to all downstream modules as a lightweight retrieval-augmented context. 

Fine-grained verification. This module operates on each Scanner-flagged window through an iterative Planner → Executor → Re-flector loop, with a maximum of 5 iterations per window. The loop terminates early if the Judge’s final_confidence reaches the threshold of 0.80. All sub-agents (Planner, Advocate, Skeptic, Judge) share a single MLLM client configured with temperature 0.5 and max tokens 1,024. 

Temporal grounding. The Grounder consolidates per-window outputs from the previous module into temporally contiguous glitch records through two steps. 1) Similarity clustering. Confirmed glitch windows are processed in chronological order. Each new glitch de-scription is compared against all existing cluster descriptions via an MLLM call; if the model returns yes , the window is merged into that cluster, otherwise a new cluster is created (greedy first-match assignment). Similarity is judged on three axes: entity appearance similarity, anomaly type similarity, and behavioral similarity. 2) 

Bidirectional propagation. For each confirmed glitch cluster, the Grounder expands the cluster both forward and backward by query-ing the model with the glitch description and the adjacent window’s image. A window is added to the cluster if the model returns yes ;propagation stops at the first non-matching window. Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang 

Figure 9: An example of the annotation process. 

Figure 10: Annotation interface used for VideoGlitchBench .Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding Preprint, 2026, Under review 

Final report generation. The Summarizer receives the list of GlitchRecord objects from the Grounder and generates the final structured report. Each record’s frame-level occurrences are converted to second-level timestamps using the extraction FPS of 4.0. The Summarizer model is configured with temperature 0.5 and max tokens 512. The output report is a JSON file containing the video name, game name, a boolean no_bugs flag, a list of natural-language bug descriptions, and a list of [start_sec, end_sec] 

time intervals corresponding to each bug. 

## B.2 Tool Implementation 

Table 7 demonstrates our tool library. Our agentic framework is equipped with three investigation tools — vqa , zoom_in , and 

object_tracking . For object_tracking , the SAM3 tracker is lazily initialized on first use and its session is shared across all windows in a batch; it is allocated to a separate GPU from the main VLM. 

## B.3 Prompts for GliDe 

We provide the core prompts used in our framework, including those for the Scanner, Planner, Reflector (Advocate, Skeptic, Judge), Grounder, and Summarizer. 

Scanner (Rough Detection) Prompt 

Role. You are a video game QA expert performing initial glitch screening. 

Input. A stitched image of 𝑁 consecutive frames, each labelled #0, #1, . . . in temporal order. 

Task. Read frames in sequence, track how objects and characters change across frames, and determine whether a glitch is present. Flag uncertain cases with low confi-dence rather than dismissing them—false negatives are more costly than false positives. 

Glitch categories: 

• Visual : texture/lighting errors, model distortion, flicker-ing, camera clipping. 

• Physics : clipping through surfaces, abnormal launch or flight, floating, jittering. 

• Game Logic : AI stuck, animation frozen while character moves, interaction failures. 

• Other : network desync, projectile anomalies, unclassifi-able behaviors. 

Confidence scale. 0.85–1.0 obvious; 0.65–0.85 clear with minor ambiguity; 0.45–0.65 suspicious; 0.25–0.45 ambigu-ous; 0.0–0.25 likely normal. Prefer flagging suspicious cases at 0.5–0.7 over dismissing them. 

game_context field (required in every response). De-scribe in 2–4 sentences the game genre, environment/set-ting, key visible elements, and observed mechanics. This field serves as a knowledge base for later stages. 

Output format:   

> {"has_glitch": true, "category": "Physics|Visual|Game Logic|Other",
> "visual_cues": "Red car at constant height in frames #4-7, no support", "reasoning": "Floating without ground contact, violates gravity", "frame_range": [4, 5, 6, 7], "confidence": 0.87, "game_context": "Open-world racing game. Urban road with traffic. ..." }// If no glitch: omit category/visual\_cues/frame\ _range; set has\_glitch to false.

Planner Prompt 

Role. You are the Planner in a video game glitch detection system. 

Input. The Scanner’s glitch hypothesis (category ,

visual_cues , confidence , game_context ) and a history of prior tool calls with their results. 

Task. Select the next investigation tool and formulate a specific, neutral question. Always call vqa on the first iteration. Available tools: 

• vqa : Ask a visual question about the full stitched window image. 

• zoom_in : Crop and magnify a region of one or more frames, then ask a question. Use when full-frame VQA was vague or the glitch is spatially localized. Parame-ters: frame_index (int or list), region (spatial name or 

[x1,y1,x2,y2] ), question .

• object_tracking : Track an object using SAM3; returns frame-by-frame bounding boxes, speed, and anomaly flags (position jump, motion freeze, velocity spike, jit-ter). Use for Physics glitches when VQA evidence is am-biguous. Parameter: object_description —a short vi-sual description of the object (e.g., “red sports car”), not 

a description of the glitch. 

Question style. Ask neutral, descriptive questions—not leading confirmations. 

• Wrong: “Is the car floating?” 

• Right: “Describe the car’s vertical position relative to the ground.” The first question must establish scene context: describe all visible objects, their appearance (color, shape, size), and what they are doing. 

Strategy. Iteration 1: always vqa . Iteration 2: prefer 

object_tracking for Physics, zoom_in for Visual/Ani-mation. Iteration 3+: conclude unless the Judge ruled 

needs_more_evidence with a specific follow-up question. Never repeat the same question. 

Output format: Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang 

> { "reasoning": "...", "tool": "vqa", "question": "..." } { "reasoning": "...", "tool": "zoom_in", " frame_index": 5, "region": "bottom_center", " question": "..." } { "reasoning": "...", "tool": "object_tracking", " object_description": "red sports car" } { "reasoning": "...", "tool": "none", "conclusion": "ready_to_conclude" }

Reflector – Advocate Prompt 

Role. You are the Advocate (prosecutor) in a video game glitch detection system. 

Input. Scanner’s glitch hypothesis and the current tool result (VQA answer, zoom result, or object tracking data). 

Task. Build a case for why the observed behavior is a glitch. (1) Identify abnormal behaviors directly visible in the tool result. 

(2) Explain why normal game mechanics cannot account for them. (3) Cite the specific physics, visual, or logic being violated. (4) Always include the specific visual appearance of the affected object (color, shape, type) so it can be distin-guished from other objects. 

Output format:  

> {"supporting_evidence": ["evidence 1 with object appearance", "..."], "affected_object_appearance": "Red sports car with black roof", "argument": "This is a glitch because...", "violated_rules": ["gravity", "collision"], "confidence_for_glitch": 0.85 }

Reflector – Skeptic Prompt 

Role. You are the Skeptic (defense) in a video game glitch detection system. 

Input. The Scanner’s glitch hypothesis and the current tool result (VQA answer, zoom result, or object tracking data). 

Task. Build a case for why the observed behavior is inten-tional game design. (1) Propose alternative explanations (game mechanics, spe-cial abilities, physics features, art style choices). (2) Identify missing context that could explain the behav-ior. (3) Point out ambiguities in the evidence. 

(4) Challenge visual grounding: ask whether the anom-aly is concretely visible in the tool result, or whether the Advocate is repeating the Scanner’s initial hypothesis without direct visual confirmation from the investiga-tion. 

Output format: 

> {"alternative_explanations": ["explanation 1", " explanation 2"], "argument": "This could be normal because...", "missing_context": ["need to check X"], "confidence_for_normal": 0.45 }

Reflector – Judge Prompt 

Role. You are the Judge (neutral arbiter) in a video game glitch detection system. 

Input. Advocate output, Skeptic output, and the full tool result. 

Task. 

(1) Visual grounding check (do this first). Verify that the alleged anomaly is directly observable in the tool results. If the Advocate’s argument rests on the Scanner hypothesis rather than concrete investigation evidence, treat it as unsubstantiated. (2) Evaluate both sides and rule: glitch (anomaly directly visible; Advocate provides specific evidence; Skeptic’s explanations are implausible); normal (Skeptic pro-vides a plausible explanation). (3) Correct the glitch category if evidence points to a dif-ferent type. 

Confidence scale. 0.85–1.0 overwhelming; 0.70–0.85 strong; 0.55–0.70 leaning with uncertainty; below 0.55 gen-uinely ambiguous. 

Output format:      

> {"advocate_summary": "...", "skeptic_summary": "...", "ruling": "glitch | normal", "reasoning": "The evidence favors X because...", "category": "Physics|Visual|Game Logic|Other", "category_corrected": false, "correction_reason": "(if corrected)", "subtype": "Floating|Clipping|...", "final_confidence": 0.78, "should_continue": false, "next_questions": ["question 1"] }// When ruling="glitch" and should_continue=false, also include: {Open-Ended Video Game Glitch Detection with Agentic Reasoning and Temporal Grounding Preprint, 2026, Under review
> "description": "Object appearance + what the glitch looks like + scene location.", "supporting_evidence": ["..."], "rejected_explanations": ["..."] }

Grounder – Glitch Clustering Prompt 

Task. Determine whether the given anomaly description belongs to an existing glitch cluster. 

Criteria for similarity: (1) similar entities—allow for mi-nor observation variance; (2) similar anomaly type (physi-cal, visual, animation); (3) similar abnormal behavior (e.g., float/flying, clipping/collision). 

Input. anomaly_description (new glitch) +

existing_descriptions (cluster, in time order). 

Output format: 

> { "reasoning": "step-by-step similarity analysis", " judgement": "yes | no" }

Grounder – Bidirectional Propagation Prompt 

Task. Detect whether the following anomaly (or a simi-lar one) is visible in the provided window image. Used to expand the temporal boundary of a confirmed glitch. 

Criteria for similarity: (1) similar entities ((objects, char-acters, creatures)) — might differ slightly due to observation variance; (2) similar anomaly type (physical, visual, anima-tion). 

Input. anomaly_description (confirmed glitch) +

stitched window image. 

Output format: 

> { "reasoning": "step-by-step visual analysis of the image", "judgement": "yes | no" }

Summarizer – Final Report Generation Prompt 

Role. You are a video game glitch analyst. 

Input. 

> Descriptions (chronological, same glitch): { descriptions} Category: {category} | Subtype: {subtype} | Time range: {time_range}

Task. Summarize the fragmented descriptions into a single, clear, coherent description for the final report. (1) Identify the core glitch phenomenon across all descrip-tions. (2) Write one coherent paragraph (2–4 sentences) that de-scribes the visual/behavioral anomaly, mentions the 

specific appearance of the affected object, and states where in the scene it occurs. 

(3) Do not include frame numbers, timestamps, JSON, or code blocks. (4) Use natural, descriptive language. 

Output. The summarized description only, without any additional text. 

## B.4 Example Execution Trace 

To better illustrate how GliDe operates in practice, we present a detailed execution trace on a representative example with multiple glitches. This case involves both collision-related errors (clipping through solid structures) and physics anomalies (launching and dis-appearance), making it a challenging scenario for reliable detection and grounding. The example highlights the full pipeline of GliDe , including high-recall candidate screening, iterative verification with tool-assisted reasoning, and temporal grounding across disjoint segments. In particular, it demonstrates how the framework rejects false positives through multi-step reasoning (e.g., Window 0), while leveraging tools such as VQA and object tracking to resolve harder cases. The Grounder further consolidates fragmented detections into coherent glitch reports with accurate temporal spans. 

Execution Trace Example of GliDe 

Game: Steep Video: 5dq755.mp4 

Ground Truth: 

- Clipping through wooden structures (collision failure). Timestamps: [0, 5], [12, 15] - Character deformation / teleportation. Timestamps: [5, 6], [8, 15] 

1. Rough Detection 

[W0] GLITCH (Visual, 0.75) – airborne anomaly [W1] GLITCH (Physics, 0.78) – clipping through barrier [W2] GLITCH (Physics, 0.75) – abnormal motion [W3] GLITCH (Physics, 0.75) – unrealistic interaction [W4] GLITCH (Physics, 0.75) – falling through terrain [W5-7] No glitch 

→ 5 candidate glitch windows detected, covering both po-tential clipping and motion anomalies. 

Game-aware context : Action-adventure game with snowy mountain terrain. The player character, dressed in a blue outfit, seems to be exploring or interacting with the environment, as indicated by the presence of an exploration camera icon. 

2. Fine-grained Verification Window 0 

Iteration 1: - Planner → VQA: "Describe ground interaction" - Answer: Character appears sliding/falling with continuous ground contact 

Advocate : glitch (possible hovering / missing collision) 

Skeptic : normal (intentional sliding or terrain interaction) 

Judge : NORMAL (confidence = 0.65, below threshold) Iteration 2: Preprint, 2026, Under review Muyang Zheng, Tong Zhou, Geyang Wu, Zihao Lin, Haibo Wang, and Lifu Huang 

- Planner → zoom-in (ground contact region) - Observation: no clear rendering or contact anomaly 

→ After multiple iterations (max=5), no strong evidence of rule violation 

Final decision: NORMAL (false positive rejected) Window 1–2 

- Planner → VQA verification - Evidence: character penetrates wooden barrier without resistance → Violates collision constraint. 

Confirmed clipping glitch Window 3 

- Planner → VQA verification - Evidence: motion inconsistent with expected gravity-driven trajectory → Indicates unstable physics behavior. 

Confirmed physics glitch Window 4 

- Planner → object tracking - Observation: tracked character abruptly disappears mid-trajectory → Strong evidence of physics engine failure (trajectory discontinuity). 

Confirmed physics glitch 3. Temporal Localization 

Initial clustering based on semantic similarity: - Cluster 1: [W1, W2] (clipping-related) - Cluster 2: [W3, W4] (teleportation-related) Bidirectional propagation with visual consistency check: - Cluster 1 → [W1, W2, W4, W5, W6] - Cluster 2 → [W2, W3, W4, W5, W6, W7] 

→ Expands temporal coverage to capture long-range and recurring glitches. 

4. Final Glitch Report Generation 

Bug 1 (Clipping): Character phases through a wooden bar-rier, violating collision constraints. Timestamps: [2–5], [8– 13] Bug 2 (Teleportation): Character launches and disappears without physical cause. Timestamps: [4–15]