Title: MAR3: Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27706v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:13:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# MAR3: Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation 

## Yuan Zhao 

College of Computer Science Inner Mongolia University Hohhot, China zy404nf@163.com 

## Zhenqi Jia 

College of Computer Science Inner Mongolia University Hohhot, China jiazhenqi7@163.com 

## Yongqiang Zhang* 

College of Computer Science Inner Mongolia University Hohhot, China zhangyongqiang@imu.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS) aims to segment objects in audible videos based on multimodal cues in reference expressions. Previous methods overlook the explicit recognition of expression difficulty and dominant modality in multimodal cues, over-rely on the quality of the instruction-tuning dataset for ob-ject reasoning, and lack reflective validation of segmentation re-sults, leading to erroneous mask predictions. To address these is-sues, in this paper, we propose a novel training-free Multi-Agent 

Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection framework to achieve high-quality Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation, termed MAR3 . In-corporating the sociological Delphi theory to achieve robust analy-sis, a Consensus Multimodal Recognition mechanism is proposed that enables LLM agents to explicitly recognize the difficulty of reference expressions and the dominant modality of multimodal cues. Based on our modality-dominant difficulty rule, we propose an adaptive Collaborative Object Reasoning strategy to reliably reason about the referred object. To further ensure precise mask prediction, we develop a Reflective Learning Segmentation mecha-nism, in which a check agent examines intermediate segmentation results and iteratively corrects the object text prompt of the seg-ment agent. Experiments demonstrate that MAR3 achieves superior performance (69.2% in J &F ) on the Ref-AVSBench dataset, out-performing SOTA by 3.4% absolutely. 

## Keywords 

Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation, Multimodal Reasoning and Understanding, Multi-Agent Systems Inspired by the fact that humans perceive the world through mul-tiple sensory organs, multimodal audio-visual reasoning and un-derstanding ( e.g. distinguishing objects of interest) have attracted growing attention in the AI community. As a novel task, Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS) [ 33 ] aims to segment objects in audible videos based on multimodal cues ( i.e. audio and visual) in the reference expression, as shown in Figure 1(a). It has substan-tial potential in real-world applications such as film production [33 ]. In complex dynamic audiovisual scenes, the need for effective multimodal information integration, deep understanding of natural language references, and precise pixel-level segmentation makes the Ref-AVS task particularly challenging. Existing Ref-AVS research can be broadly categorized into two groups. The first group of methods [ 23 , 33 , 34 ] focuses on integrat-ing audio, video and text into unified multimodal features, which are then used as prompts to guide segmentation decoders [ 15 , 25 ]in generating binary masks of the referred object. However, these The object making a sound by being played by the man wearing a hat. 

> Video Frames
> Audio Stream
> Model
> (a) Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS) Task

...    

> Collaborative Object Reasoning
> Auxiliary Modality Agent Dominant Modality Agent
> Check Agent Segment Agent
> Reflective Learning Segmentation Consensus Multimodal Recognition
> Independent Thinking Peer Interaction Final Decision
> Difficulty :Moderate ;Dominant Modality :Visual ;Auxiliary Modality :Audio
> (b) Illustration of our proposed MAR3

... 

> Reference Expression (Multimodal cues)
> The object producing the loudest sound.
> The object being played by the man on the right.
> Reference Expression : The object being played by the man on the right.

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the Reference Audio-Visual Seg-mentation (Ref-AVS) task. (b) Our proposed MAR3 first ex-plicitly recognizes the difficulty of reference expressions and the dominant modality of multimodal cues, then performs referred object reasoning based on the modality-dominant difficulty rule, and finally generates the precise prediction mask through iterative optimization of the referred object prompt based on intermediate segmentation results. 

methods typically perform only implicit processing of multimodal input, overlooking the cues contained in the reference expression that relate to the contributions of the audio and video modalities. For example, as shown in Figure 1(a), for the reference expression of “The object being played by the man on the right.”, we can ana-lyze that the primary focus should be on the visual modality, while the audio modality can serve as an auxiliary, and the difficulty is relatively moderate. However, this aspect is often overlooked in previous research. The other family of methods [ 6, 42 ] first tunes a multimodal large language model (MLLM) for referred object reasoning, and then proceeds to segmentation. These methods typically rely on multimodal large language models ( e.g. Gemini-1.5-Pro [ 28 ]) that have more parameters than the model itself and construct high-quality instruction-tuning datasets through a carefully designed chain of thought. However, not only does this require significant computational resources, but, more importantly, these methods are heavily dependent on the quality of the instruction-tuning dataset, which can result in suboptimal reasoning performance for   

> arXiv:2603.27706v1 [cs.MM] 29 Mar 2026 arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org Zhao et al.

the referred objects. Furthermore, existing methods generally use a single-stage segmentation process, without further verification to ensure that the segmentation results match the reference expression, leading to inaccurate segmentation mask predictions. To address the above issues, we propose a novel training-free 

Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection framework to achieve high-quality Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation, termed 

MAR3 (as shown in Figure 1(b)). It contains three mechanisms: (1) Drawing inspiration from human cognitive processes, where task in-struction analysis precedes execution, we design a Consensus Mul-timodal Recognition (CMR) mechanism that enables different LLM agents to explicitly recognize the difficulty of reference expressions and the dominant modality of the multimodal cues. In particular, we incorporate the sociological Delphi theory [ 1, 10 , 18 , 24 , 30 , 40 ]—a structured decision-making framework originally developed for expert consensus forecasting—to achieve robust analysis results. Different Multimodal Cues Analysis (MCA) agents first indepen-dently think about the reference expression, then share and cross-reference their results and reason during peer interaction to reach a more unbiased understanding, and finally one final MCA agent consolidates the discussion results and makes the final decision. (2) To reliably reason about the referred object, we propose an adaptive Collaborative Object Reasoning strategy. According to our defined modality-dominant difficulty rule, for low-difficulty expressions, the dominant-modality agent performs reasoning independently; for moderate- or high-difficulty cases, we adopt a multi-agent col-laboration approach, where the dominant-modality agent integrates relevant information from auxiliary-modality agents ( e.g. the candi-date object list and reasoning rationale) to derive a more precise result. (3) We propose a Reflective Learning Segmentation mecha-nism, which incorporates a check agent that examines intermediate segmentation results to verify their consistency with the reference expression, and then iteratively refines the object text prompts of the segment agent based on this feedback. Leveraging such reflec-tive learning, our method effectively improves the accuracy of mask prediction. In summary, the main contributions of this paper can be sum-marized as follows: 

• We propose MAR3 , a training-free multi-agent framework that decomposes the Ref-AVS task into phases of Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection, enabling a deep understanding of multimodal cues, reliable reasoning about the referred objects, and precise mask prediction. 

• We design a Consensus Multimodal Recognition mechanism to explicitly recognize the difficulty and dominant modality in the reference expression and multimodal cues using the sociological Delphi theory. An adaptive Collaborative Ob-ject Reasoning strategy is proposed to reliably reason about the referred object by establishing collaboration between dominant- and auxiliary-modality agents. Additionally, we develop a Reflective Learning Segmentation mechanism to en-sure precise mask prediction where a check agent iteratively corrects the object text prompts for the segment agent based on intermediate segmentation results. 

• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed MAR3 achieves superior performance (69.2% in J &F ) on the Ref-AVS benchmark, outperforming SOTA by 3.4% absolutely, while various ablation studies validate the effectiveness of each proposed module. 

## 1 Related Works 1.1 Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation 

Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS) [ 33 ] aims to gener-ate binary masks of objects in audible videos based on multimodal cues ( i.e. audio and visual) in the reference expression. Some works [ 23 , 33 , 34 ] focus on integrating audio, video, and text into unified multimodal features and then using them as prompts to guide the segmentation decoder [ 15 , 25 ] to generate precise masks across video frames. For example, SAM2-LOVE [ 34 ] designs a multimodal fusion Transformer to integrate textual, audio, and visual infor-mation into a learnable [seg] token, which serves as a prompt for the fine-tuned SAM2 [ 25 ] decoder to perform final video seg-mentation. In addition, some works [ 6 , 42 ] first instruction-tune a multimodal large language model (MLLM) to reason about the target object referred by the expression, and then perform the sub-sequent segmentation stage. For instance, TGS-Agent [ 42 ] trains a reasoning-enhanced MLLM using an instruction-tuning dataset, which converts multimodal inputs into descriptions of the referred object, then uses it to guide Grounding-DINO [ 20 ] and SAM2 [ 25 ]for localization and segmentation. However, existing methods ne-glect explicit recognition of expression difficulty and dominant modality, both of which are crucial for Ref-AVS. They also over-rely on the quality of the instruction-tuning dataset, resulting in suboptimal object reasoning, and lack reflective checks, causing erroneous mask predictions. To address the above-mentioned issues, a Consensus Multimodal Recognition mechanism is proposed to recognize the difficulty and dominant modality in the reference expression and multimodal cues. We propose a Collaborative Object Reasoning strategy to reliably reason about the referred object, and a Reflective Learning Segmentation mechanism to ensure precise mask prediction. 

## 1.2 Multi-Agent System 

Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have boosted the development of artificial intelligence multi-agent systems (MAS), which are composed of multiple autonomous or semi-autonomous agents that work together through collaboration, communication, and coordination to complete complex tasks [ 9,11 , 13 , 19 , 31 , 35 ]. MAS has been widely applied to a variety of tasks, such as text-to-image generation [ 4 , 16 , 36 ], medical diagnosis [ 14 , 22 , 43 ], and audio generation [ 17 , 26 , 41 ]. For example, MCCD [16 ] designs a multi-agent scene parsing module that uses MLLMs to effectively extract detailed scene elements from text, generating realistic and aesthetically pleasing complex scene images. Tree-of-Reasoning [ 22 ] proposes a multi-agent framework that enhances reasoning ability and interpretability in complex medical diagnosis tasks by introducing a reasoning tree structure based on clinical evidence and a multi-agent cross-validation mechanism. MAR3: Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org Reference Expression : 

The object being played by the man on the right. 

Difficulty :High ; Dominant Modality :

Audio +Visual ; Reason: The task requires both audio and video to determine object... 

Difficulty :Moderate ; Dominant Modality :

Visual ;AuxiliaryModality :Audio ; Reason :The expression requires visual more than audio to find the object... 

Difficulty :Low ; Dominant Modality :

Visual ; Reason: The task relies solely on video to locate the object, because ... 

Independent Thinking Peer Interaction 

Stage #1: Consensus Multimodal Recognition 

Difficulty: High ;

Dominant Modality: Audio +Visual 

Stage #2: Collaborative Object Reasoning  

> Initially Referred Object : Double bass; Reason : The audio features a prominent double bass melody, and the reference expression points to the object being played by the man on the right...
> Candidate Object List; Reason

Or  

> Reference Expression
> Reference Expression
> Candidate Object List; Reason
> Audio Auxiliary Information Visual Auxiliary Information

Difficulty: Moderate ; Dominant Modality: Visual ;Auxiliary Modality: Audio  

> Initially Referred Object : Double bass; Reason : The reference expression identifies the object ...
> Candidate Object List; Reason
> Reference Expression
> Reference Expression
> Audio Auxiliary Information

Difficulty: Low ;

Dominant Modality: Visual  

> Initially Referred Object : Double bass; Reason : The reference expression specifies....
> Reference Expression

Or 

Stage #3: Reflective Learning Segmentation 

Initial Segmentation 

> Initially Referred Object
> Segment Agent Initial Mask

Iterative Segmentation   

> Check Agent
> Revised Referred Object
> ✖NSegment Agent
> Reference Expression
> Revised Mask
> Multimodal Cues Analysis Agent #1 Multimodal Cues Analysis Agent #2 Multimodal Cues Analysis Agent #3
> Audio Auxiliary Agent Visual Dominant Agent Audio-Visual Dominant Agent

Difficulty: Moderate 

Dominant Modality: Visual ;Auxiliary Modality: Audio ;Reason: The expression mainly requires visual localization of the man and the object, with audio providing supplementary information about the action. 

> Discussion Result #2
> Discussion Result #1
> Discussion Result #3
> Final Multimodal Cues Analysis Agent

Final Decision 

> Visual Dominant Agent
> Audio Auxiliary Agent Visual Auxiliary Agent

Figure 2: The architecture of our MAR3, which contains three mechanisms: Consensus Multimodal Recognition (CMR), Collaborative Object Reasoning (COR), and Reflective Learning Segmentation (RLS). CMR explicitly recognizes the difficulty and dominant modality in the referring expression and multimodal cues using the sociological Delphi theory. COR is designed to reliably reason about the referred object through collaboration between dominant- and auxiliary-modality agents. RLS ensures precise mask prediction where a check agent iteratively corrects the object text prompts for the segment agent based on intermediate segmentation results. 

In dynamic complex audio-visual scenes, the Ref-AVS task re-quires effective integration of multimodal information, deep un-derstanding of natural language references, and precise pixel-level segmentation, making it a highly coupled task involving multiple complex objectives. The MAS system provides an ideal solution by decomposing complex problems into coordinated sub-tasks and assigning specialized roles to each task. Therefore, we apply the MAS system to the Ref-AVS task for the first time. Specifically, we decompose the Ref-AVS task into three sub-tasks ( i.e. Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection) to achieve high-quality reference audio-visual segmentation. Moreover, our proposed training-free MAR3 framework reduces the need for computationally expensive joint optimization, effectively addresses the core challenges of the Ref-AVS task, and significantly enhances the system’s flexibility and adaptability. arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org Zhao et al. 

## 2 MAR3: Methodology 2.1 Overview 

In this paper, we propose MAR3, a novel training-free Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection framework, tailored for high-quality Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS). MAR3 is designed to enable deep multimodal cue comprehension, reliable referred object reasoning, and accurate segmentation mask pre-diction. The main architecture of our proposed method is shown in Figure 2; it contains three mechanisms: (1) In the Consensus Multimodal Recognition (CMR) mechanism, we construct different multimodal cue analysis agents to explicitly recognize the difficulty of reference expressions and the dominant modality of the multi-modal cues through independent thinking, peer interaction, and fi-nal decision processes. (2) In Collaborative Object Reasoning (COR) mechanism, for low-difficulty expressions, the dominant modal-ity agent performs reasoning independently, while for moderate-and high-difficulty scenarios, a collaborative paradigm is adopted where the dominant modality agent integrates essential informa-tion provided by auxiliary modality agents to perform referred object reasoning. (3) In Reflective Learning Segmentation (RLS) mechanism, we devise a check agent that examines intermediate segmentation results and iteratively corrects the object text prompt of the segment agent. 

## 2.2 Consensus Multimodal Recognition 

Drawing inspiration from the human cognitive process, where the analysis instruction occurs before executing a task, we design the Consensus Multimodal Recognition (CMR) mechanism to explic-itly recognize the difficulty of reference expressions and the domi-nant modality of multimodal cues. Specifically, we first introduce a modality-dominant difficulty rule to correlate the difficulty level of reference expressions with multimodal cues, which is categorized as follows: (1) Low Difficulty: When the dominant modality is either audio or visual. (2) Moderate Difficulty: When the dominant modal-ity is audio and the auxiliary modality is visual, or vice versa. (3) High Difficulty: When both audio and visual are dominant modal-ities. Then, to achieve a deep understanding of multimodal cues, we introduce the sociological Delphi Method [ 1 , 10 , 18 , 24 , 30 , 40 ]into our recognition process. The Delphi method relies on a panel of experts who participate in independent evaluation, anonymous feedback, and final decision-making to reach a high-quality con-sensus. By mapping this sociological framework to LLM agents, we formulate a systematic recognition process, which includes in-dependent thinking, peer interaction, and a final decision-making phase to yield robust analysis results. For the output of each phase, we define three key elements: difficulty, dominant and auxiliary modality, and reason. 

Independent Thinking. To mitigate potential biases inherent in a single-agent architecture and enhance the robustness and accuracy of the analytical outcomes, we employ three heterogeneous LLM agents as Multimodal Cues Analysis (MCA) agents. Each MCA agent independently evaluates the following dimensions of a given reference expression: difficulty, dominant modality, and reason. We apply the predefined modality-dominant difficulty rule to the prompt, where each agent receives the same input and derives its own understanding and conclusions through their independent thinking. 

Peer Interaction. According to Delphi theory [ 1, 10 , 18 , 24 , 30 , 40 ], multiple rounds of expert feedback and interaction can effectively reduce biases. Inspired by this, we design a peer interaction mecha-nism. In this process, each MCA agent refers to the independent thinking results of the other two MCA agents (including difficulty, dominant modality, and reason), then reanalyzes the reference ex-pression based on these results and generates its own discussion result. The output format is consistent with the initial analysis. Through peer interaction, the agents can validate and correct the analysis results of each other, thus enhancing the overall accuracy and consistency of the analysis. 

Final Decision. After peer interaction, the final MCA agent makes a decision based on the discussion results of each agent, forming a unified conclusion. By integrating the perspectives of different agents, the final agent gains a more comprehensive understanding of the multimodal cues and the difficulty of the reference expres-sion. This final unified conclusion will then serve as the basis for subsequent reasoning and segmentation processes. Through Delphi-based consensus mechanism, we can accurately recognize the difficulty of the reference expression and the domi-nant modality of the multimodal cues, providing more robust sup-port for subsequent reliable reasoning about the referred objects and precise segmentation mask prediction. 

## 2.3 Collaborative Object Reasoning 

In multi-agent systems, collaboration has become a vital paradigm for solving complex tasks [ 3, 5, 12 , 21 , 27 , 32 , 38 ]. Inspired by human team collaboration and collective reasoning processes, we design a Collaborative Object Reasoning (COR) mechanism. This mechanism enables reliable reasoning about the referred object from dynamic audio-visual scenes by establishing collaboration between dominant modality agents and auxiliary modality agents. Specifically, we adjust the reasoning path of agents based on our modality-dominant difficulty rule: for low-difficulty expressions, the dominant modality agent is directly employed, while for moderate- or high-difficulty cases, the dominant modality agent integrates vital information provided by auxiliary-modality agents to perform reasoning. 

Difficulty: Low. For low-difficulty cases, if the dominant modality is visual, the visual agent receives video frames and the reference expression; if the dominant modality is audio, the audio agent receives audio streams and the reference expression. In both cases, the agent independently reasons about the initially referred object and its reason. 

Difficulty: Moderate. For moderate-difficulty cases, when the dominant modality is visual, and the auxiliary modality is audio, the audio auxiliary agent receives the audio stream and reference expression and generates the candidate object list and reason, which are passed to the visual dominant agent. The visual dominant agent, based on audio auxiliary information, reference expression, and video frames, independently reasons the initially referred object and its reason. If the dominant modality is audio and the auxiliary modality is visual, a similar reasoning process is executed. 

Difficulty: High. In high-difficulty cases, where both audio and visual modalities are dominant, the audio auxiliary agent and the MAR3: Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org 

visual auxiliary agent independently analyze their respective modal-ities and reference expressions, and generate a candidate object list and reason. Based on the audio stream, video frames, and ref-erence expression, the audio-visual dominant agent receives and integrates this auxiliary information, jointly reasoning about the initially referred object. This collaborative object reasoning pro-cess ensures that both modalities contribute to the final reasoning, enabling reliable reasoning in complex audio-visual scenes. Through this adaptive collaboration strategy, our MAR3 effec-tively integrates the strengths of both dominant and auxiliary modality agents, ensuring a reliable foundation for subsequent precise segmentation mask prediction. 

## 2.4 Reflective Learning Segmentation 

In human cognitive processes, reflective learning is crucial to contin-uously improving the quality of decision-making. Based on this the-ory, Reflective Learning Segmentation (RLS) is proposed to achieve accurate segmentation mask prediction through iterative correction of the referred object prompt based on intermediate segmentation results. Specifically, our RLS module is divided into two stages: Initial Segmentation and Iterative Segmentation, details of which are provided in the following sections. 

Initial Segmentation. In the Initial Segmentation stage, the seg-ment agent receives the initially referred object output from the col-laborative object reasoning process as a text prompt and performs segmentation on the video frames to generate an initial prediction mask. 

Iterative Segmentation. In the Iterative Segmentation stage, the check agent inspects the audible video with the initial mask to ensure it matches the reference expression. If a mismatch is found, the check agent corrects the referred object prompt based on the intermediate segmentation results and passes the revised referred object prompt back to the segment agent, which generates the revised mask. Unlike previous work [ 42 ], which first grounds and then per-forms segmentation, our RLS directly performs segmentation based on object text prompts, thus avoiding errors caused by inaccu-rate localization. Moreover, segmentation guided by the initially referred object prompt establishes the foundation for the initial segmentation quality, while reflective learning effectively corrects errors and optimizes the prompt, thereby overcoming performance bottlenecks. 

## 3 Experiment 3.1 Experimental Settings 

Dataset. We evaluate our MAR3 on the Ref-AVSBench dataset [ 33 ], which contains 4,000 audible videos with pixel-level annotations and corresponding expressions, covering 51 object classes. The dataset is divided into 2,908 videos for training, 276 videos for validation, and 818 videos for testing. The test set is further divided into three subsets: (1) Seen set: composed of the 39 categories that appear in training. (2) Unseen set: contains 13 additional categories not seen during the training stage. (3) Null set: refers to expressions that do not correspond to any object in the videos and are excluded from the evaluation in this paper. 

Evaluation Metrics. Following previous work [ 33 ], we use the Jac-card index ( J ) and the F-score ( F ) as the main evaluation metrics. The Jaccard index ( J ) measures the ratio of intersection to union between predicted and ground truth masks. A higher value indi-cates better overlap and segmentation performance. The F-score (F ) is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, which balances accuracy and coverage in predicting positive samples. A higher F-score shows better overall classification performance. Addition-ally, we report the average of these two metrics ( J & F ) for a more comprehensive evaluation. 

Implementation Details. The Frames Per Second of the video is set to 1, and the audio sampling rate is set to 22,050 Hz. In the Consensus Multimodal Recognition mechanism, for MCA Agent #1, we use Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct [ 29 ]; for MCA Agent #2, we use GLM4-32B [ 7 ]; and for MCA Agent #3 and MCA Agent #4, we use Deepseek-R1-32B [ 8 ]. In the Collaborative Object Reason-ing mechanism, for the Visual Agent, Audio Agent, and Audio-Visual Agent, we use Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Instruct [ 37 ]. In the Reflective Learning Segmentation, for the Check Agent, we use Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Instruct [ 37 ], and for the Segment Agent, we use SAM3 [ 2 ]. We limit the maximum iterative segmentation to 2 steps. All experiments are conducted on an A100 GPU. Details on the prompts of each stage can be found in Appendix A of the supplementary material. 

## 3.2 Main Results 

We perform a performance comparison of our proposed MAR3 with previous SOTA methods on the standard Ref-AVSBench dataset. The results of all compared baselines are obtained from the origi-nal papers or their official implementations. As shown in Table 1, our MAR3 achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to all these methods in most key metrics. On the Mix (S+U) and Seen sub-sets, our MAR3 outperforms the second-best method, TGS-Agent [42 ], by 3.4% and 7.4% in J &F , respectively. We attribute this sub-stantial performance gain to our core design, i.e. unlike previous methods that rely solely on multimodal fusion [ 23 , 33 , 34 ] or depend heavily on the quality of instruction tuning datasets [ 6, 42 ], MAR3 introduces a training-free multi-agent workflow, which successfully decomposes the complex Ref-AVS task in dynamic audio-visual sce-narios into three sub-tasks: deep multimodal cues understanding, reliable object reasoning, and precise segmentation mask prediction. Additionally, without relying on training resources, our method achieves comparable performance to TGS-Agent on the Unseen 

subset, with only a 0.5% difference in J &F , which further demon-strates the effectiveness of our training-free MAR3. 

## 3.3 Ablation Study 

Effectiveness of Consensus Multimodal Recognition. We con-duct ablation studies to verify the effectiveness of our Consensus Multimodal Recognition (CMR) mechanism, as shown in Table 2. First, completely removing the CMR module (w/o CMR) leads to a significant decrease in performance ( e.g. from 64.1% to 60.8% in 

J and from 74.2% to 70.9% in F on Mix (S+U) set), demonstrating the necessity of explicitly recognizing the difficulty of reference expressions and the dominant modality of multimodal cues be-fore executing Ref-AVS. Furthermore, we validate the impact of arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org Zhao et al. 

Table 1: Comparison with other methods on Ref-AVSBench dataset. J &F = (J + F )/ 2 in each subset. “ ↑” indicates higher is better. (Though the asterisked (*) results do not achieve optimal performance, the performance gap remains minimal.)                                                                                

> Method Venue Mix (S+U) ↑Seen ↑Unseen ↑JFJ&FJFJ&FJFJ&F
> EEMC [33] ECCV 2024 41.9 58.1 50.0 34.2 51.3 42.8 49.5 64.8 57.2 TSAM [23] CVPR 2025 49.0 61.6 55.3 43.4 56.8 50.1 54.6 66.4 60.5 SAM2-LOVE [34] CVPR 2025 55.0 62.1 58.6 43.5 51.9 47.7 66.5 72.3 69.4 Crab [6] CVPR 2025 43.1 40.5 45.6 OISA [39] ICCV 2025 54.5 61.4 58.0 51.7 58.7 55.2 58.3 65.1 61.7 TGS-Agent [42] AAAI 2026 61.2 70.3 65.8 49.4 60.1 54.8 72.9 80.4 76.7 MAR3 (Ours) -64.1 74.2 69.2 56.1 68.2 62.2 72.1* 80.2* 76.2*

Table 2: Ablation study on each component of our proposed MAR3. CMR denotes the Consensus Multimodal Recognition mechanism, where Delphi refers to the sociological Delphi theory in CMR. COR and RLS represent the Collaborative Object Reasoning mechanism and Reflective Learning Seg-mentation mechanism, respectively. 

Method Mix (S+U) ↑ Seen ↑ Unseen ↑J F J F J F

w/o CMR 60.8 70.9 53.0 64.8 68.5 76.9 w/o Delphi in CMR 61.5 71.9 55.2 67.2 67.8 76.5 w/o COR 62.8 72.9 55.9 67.9 69.7 77.9 w/o RLS 60.4 70.5 53.0 64.7 67.8 76.3 Our MAR3 64.1 74.2 56.1 68.2 72.1 80.2 

the Delphi theory in CMR. Relying solely on single-agent analy-sis, without the multi-agent consensus mechanism (w/o Delphi in CMR), leads to inferior performance compared to the full model (e.g. 61.5% vs. 64.1% in J and 71.9% vs. 74.2% in F on Mix (S+U) set). These results indicate that single-agent analysis is prone to poten-tial biases, while introducing a Delphi-based consensus mechanism among multiple MCA agents effectively corrects errors through peer interaction and collective decision-making, thus achieving a deeper and more robust multimodal understanding. 

Effectiveness of Collaborative Object Reasoning. To verify the effectiveness of the multimodal collaboration strategy within the Collaborative Object Reasoning (COR) mechanism, we con-duct ablation studies and the results are shown in the 3rd and 5th rows of Table 2. We compare the full model with an ablation model that removes the collaboration mechanism and relies solely on the dominant modality agent for independent reasoning (w/o COR). The results show that the full model achieves an improvement of 1.3% (from 62.8% to 64.1% in J and from 72.9% to 74.2% in F ) on 

Mix (S+U) set compared to the ablation model. This clearly demon-strates the innovative advantage of the COR mechanism, i.e. relying solely on a single dominant modality is prone to misjudgment in moderate- or high-difficulty scenarios. By incorporating candidate object lists and reason provided by auxiliary-modality agents, COR effectively overcomes the limitations of single-modality perception, thus leading to more reliable object reasoning. 

Table 3: Ablation study on the maximum number of Reflective-Learning steps in the RLS mechanism.                                   

> Reflective-Learning
> ×𝑁
> Mix (S+U) ↑Seen ↑Unseen ↑JFJFJF
> 060.4 70.5 53.0 64.7 67.8 76.3 163.3 73.4 55.9 67.9 70.7 78.8 264.1 74.2 56.1 68.2 72.1 80.2
> 363.5 73.6 55.8 67.8 71.2 79.3

Effectiveness of Reflective Learning Segmentation. To validate the effectiveness of the Reflective Learning Segmentation (RLS) mechanism, we conduct ablation experiments, as shown in the 4th and 5th rows of Table 2. We can see that removal of RLS (w/o RLS) leads to a significant performance drop, J decreases from 64.1% to 60.4% and F decreases from 74.2% to 70.5% on Mix (S+U) set, which indicates that the iterative referred object prompt revised by the check agent is crucial for overcoming the single-stage segmentation bottleneck and improving mask prediction accuracy. Furthermore, we validate the effect of the number of reflective learning iterations 

𝑁 in RLS. As shown in Table 3, performance first improves and then degrades as 𝑁 increases, achieving the best trade-off at 𝑁 = 2.This suggests that moderate reflection effectively corrects initial inference biases, whereas excessive iterations ( e.g. 𝑁 = 3) may over-correct the prompt or introduce unnecessary noise, resulting in a slight performance decline. Overall, these results demonstrate that our reflective learning mitigates errors in single-stage segmentation and yields accuracy and robustness gains with only a few iterations (𝑁 = 2). 

## 3.4 Difficulty and Dominant Modality Proportions of Expressions 

Difficulty Proportions. To gain a deeper understanding of the difficulty of reference expressions in the Ref-AVS task, we report the proportions of different difficulty levels in the Ref-AVSBench test set as recognized by our proposed CMR, as shown in Figure 4a. The Mix (S+U) subset is mainly dominated by high-difficulty samples (66.8%), while low- and moderate-difficulty cases account for relatively smaller proportions. This indicates that the test set is composed MAR3: Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org Audio Stream: 

TGS-Agent: The referential expression is: The object with the lengthiest duration of sound.\nThe video shows a small dog lying on a wooden floor. A person is holding a hair dryer and pointing it at the dog. The audio contains the distinct sound of a dog whimpering or whining, which persists throughout the video. The referential expression relates to the audio modality, specifically the duration of the dog's whimpering sound. The dog remains mostly static, with slight movements, while the hair dryer is held and moved slightly. Keyframes 1, 5, and 10 capture the dog's consistent presence and the hair dryer's position. 

Referred Object: Dog ;

(b) Reference Expression ：The object with the lengthiest duration of sound. GT-Object: Hair-dryer 

MAR3 (Our): CMR: Difficulty: Moderate ; Dominant Modality: Audio ; Auxiliary Modality: Visual ; Reason: The expression primarily relies on audio to measure the duration of sound, making it the primary modality. However, video is necessary as an auxiliary to confirm the object's identity, as audio alone cannot definitively link the sound to the correct object. Thus, the difficulty is moderate with audio as the primary modality. 

COR: Visual Auxiliary Information: [dog, hair-dryer]; The reference expression specifies the object with the longest duration of sound. In the video, the hair-dryer is the source of a continuous, loud buzzing sound, while the dog's sounds (growling, barking) are intermittent; Reason of Initially Referred Object :The dog is the only object in the audio that is present for the entire duration of the clip, making it the object with the lengthiest duration of sound; Initially Referred Object : Dog ;

RLS: Match: False ; Revised Referred Object: Hair-dryer ;

Audio Stream: 

TGS-Agent: The referential expression is: \"The object producing sound through singing and ukulele playing.\". The video shows a girl playing a red ukulele and singing. The audio contains the sound of ukulele playing and the girl's singing voice. The referential expression relates to both visual and auditory modalities, referring to the ukulele as the source of the sound. The ukulele is held by the girl and remains relatively static throughout the video. 

Referred Object: Ukulele ;

(a) Reference Expression ：The object producing sound through singing and ukulele playing. GT-Object ：Girl 

MAR3 (Our): CMR: Difficulty: High ; Dominant Modality: Audio+ Visual ; Reason: Both audio and video are essential to identify the object producing both singing and ukulele sounds, resulting in high difficulty. 

COR: Audio Auxiliary Information: [girl, ukulele];The audio contains a female voice singing accompanied by ukulele music; Visual Auxiliary Information: 

[girl, ukulele]; The reference expression describes an object that produces sound through singing and ukulele playing. The girl is the one actively playing the ukulele, and her mouth is slightly open, suggesting she might be singing. The ukulele is the instrument producing the sound. Both are directly involved in the sound production as described in the reference expression; Reason of Initially Referred Object : The girl is visually shown playing the ukulele and her mouth movements suggest she is singing, which aligns with the audio of a female voice singing accompanied by ukulele music. Initially Referred Object : Girl ;RLS: Match: True ;

Figure 3: The visualization results of our MAR3, along with the second-best method TGS-Agent. Additional qualitative visualizations and comparative examples can be found in Appendix B of the supplemental material. 

largely of challenging expressions rather than simple ones. Such a distribution of difficulty proportions strongly supports our design motivation of “analyzing the instruction before executing the task ”. Moreover, comparing Figure 4b and Figure 4c, we observe that the Seen subset contains a higher proportion of high-difficulty expressions (72.05%), whereas the proportion in the Unseen subset arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org Zhao et al.   

> (a) (S+U) (b) Seen (c) Unseen

Figure 4: Difficulty proportions of reference expressions on the Ref-AVSBench test set, identified by our Consensus Multimodal Recognition (CMR) mechanism based on the modality-dominant difficulty rule.   

> (a) (S+U) (b) Seen (c) Unseen

Figure 5: Dominant modality proportions of reference expressions on the Ref-AVSBench test set, identified by our Consensus Multimodal Recognition (CMR) mechanism based on the modality-dominant difficulty rule. 

is relatively lower (59.49%). This discrepancy is consistent with the common observation that existing methods [ 6 , 23 , 33 , 34 , 42 ]often perform better on Unseen samples than on the Seen ones, and it also indirectly demonstrates the effectiveness of our CMR in accurately and reliably recognizing the difficulty of each reference expression. 

Dominant Modality Proportions. To further analyze the multi-modal cues of reference expressions in the Ref-AVS task, we report the proportions of dominant modalities in multimodal cues, as shown in Figure 5a. Audio+Visual co-dominance accounts for the largest portion (66.8%), which is higher than visual-only dominance (14.45%) and audio-only dominance (6.87%). There are also “dom-inant + auxiliary” cases, i.e. audio-dominant with visual-auxiliary (8.47%), and visual-dominant with audio-auxiliary (3.41%). These results validate the necessity of explicitly recognizing the dominant modality from multimodal cues and provide a basis for the adap-tive “dominant agent + auxiliary agent” collaborative reasoning in our Collaborative Object Reasoning (COR) module. Moreover, com-paring Seen (Figure 5b) and Unseen (Figure 5c) subsets, the Seen subset contains a higher proportion of Audio+Visual dominance (72.05%), while the Unseen subset is relatively lower (59.49%), and the audio-related proportion increases in Unseen (audio-dominant of 10.83%, and audio-dominant with visual-auxiliary of 11.13%). This discrepancy suggests that modality dependence varies across subsets and further supports the need for adaptive reasoning paths in COR. 

## 3.5 Qualitative Analysis 

To provide a more intuitive and comprehensive understanding of the effectiveness of our method, we conduct a qualitative compar-ison between our proposed MAR3 and the second-best method, TGS-Agent [42]. 

Reliable Reasoning for Referred Objects. As shown in Figure 3 (a), the CMR mechanism based on Delphi theory [ 1, 10 , 18 , 24 , 30 , 40 ]can effectively recognize both the difficulty level of the reference expression and the dominant modality contained within multimodal cues. Through this process, the COR mechanism is able to adaptively integrate relevant and useful auxiliary information from both audio and visual modalities under a collaborative reasoning paradigm, thereby enabling a more accurate and reliable inference of the initially referred object, while our RLS is further able to yield a more precise segmentation mask prediction. 

Error Correction via Reflective Learning. As illustrated in Fig-ure 3(b), similar to TGS-Agent which mistakenly identifies “Dog” as the object with the longest sound duration, our method may initially infer an incorrect referent. Nevertheless, the proposed Reflective Learning mechanism allows it to quickly inspect intermediate seg-mentation outputs and generate a revised referred-object prompt (Hair-dryer) accordingly. These examples further demonstrate the distinct advantage and effectiveness of our method over the base-line in achieving high-quality reference audio-visual segmentation. Additionally, more qualitative visualizations and detailed compara-tive examples can be found in Appendix B of the supplementary material. 

## 4 Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose MAR3, a training-free multi-agent frame-work that decomposes the complex Ref-AVS task into Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection, to deeply understand multimodal cues, reliably reason about referred objects, and precisely generate seg-mentation mask predictions. A Consensus Multimodal Recognition module is designed to explicitly recognize the difficulty of refer-ence expressions and the dominant modality of multimodal cues. An adaptive Collaborative Object Reasoning (COR) strategy is pro-posed to reliably reason about the referred object by adopting a difficulty-aware collaboration paradigm. Finally, we develop a Re-flective Learning Segmentation (RLS) mechanism to ensure precise mask prediction by employing reflective learning between the check MAR3: Multi-Agent Recognition, Reasoning, and Reflection for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org 

agent and the segment agent. Despite its effectiveness, our method has not been specifically designed to handle cases where the ex-pression refers to an object that does not actually exist in the video, but we plan to further explore this special case in our future work. We believe that this work provides important insights and valuable inspiration for the further development of multimodal reasoning and understanding, as well as multi-agent systems. 

## References 

[1] Maite Barrios, Georgina Guilera, Laura Nuño, and Juana Gómez-Benito. 2021. Consensus in the Delphi method: what makes a decision change? Technological Forecasting and Social Change 163 (2021), 120484. [2] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, An-drew Huang, et al . 2025. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 (2025). [3] Boyu Chen, Zhengrong Yue, Siran Chen, Zikang Wang, Yang Liu, Peng Li, and Yali Wang. 2025. Lvagent: Long video understanding by multi-round dynami-cal collaboration of mllm agents. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 20237–20246. [4] Chieh-Yun Chen, Min Shi, Gong Zhang, and Humphrey Shi. 2025. T2i-copilot: A training-free multi-agent text-to-image system for enhanced prompt interpre-tation and interactive generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 19396–19405. [5] Yanbo Ding, Shaobin Zhuang, Kunchang Li, Zhengrong Yue, Yu Qiao, and Yali Wang. 2025. Muses: 3d-controllable image generation via multi-modal agent collaboration. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,Vol. 39. 2753–2761. [6] Henghui Du, Guangyao Li, Chang Zhou, Chunjie Zhang, Alan Zhao, and Di Hu. 2025. Crab: A unified audio-visual scene understanding model with explicit coop-eration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference .18804–18814. [7] Team GLM, Aohan Zeng, Bin Xu, Bowen Wang, Chenhui Zhang, Da Yin, Dan Zhang, Diego Rojas, Guanyu Feng, Hanlin Zhao, et al . 2024. Chatglm: A fam-ily of large language models from glm-130b to glm-4 all tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12793 (2024). [8] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al . 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025). [9] Shanshan Han, Qifan Zhang, Yuhang Yao, Weizhao Jin, and Zhaozhuo Xu. 2024. LLM multi-agent systems: Challenges and open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03578 (2024). [10] Erik Hohmann, Mark P Cote, and Jefferson C Brand. 2018. Research pearls: expert consensus based evidence using the Delphi method. Arthroscopy: the journal of arthroscopic & related surgery 34, 12 (2018), 3278–3282. [11] Li Hu, Guoqiang Chen, Xiuwei Shang, Shaoyin Cheng, Benlong Wu, LiGangyang LiGangyang, Xu Zhu, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. 2025. CompileAgent: Automated real-world repo-level compilation with tool-integrated LLM-based agent system. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . 2078–2091. [12] Panwen Hu, Jin Jiang, Jianqi Chen, Mingfei Han, Shengcai Liao, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan Liang. 2024. Storyagent: Customized storytelling video generation via multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04925 (2024). [13] Kaiyi Huang, Yukun Huang, Xuefei Ning, Zinan Lin, Yu Wang, and Xihui Liu. 2026. Genmac: compositional text-to-video generation with multi-agent collaboration. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 40. 5049–5057. [14] Yubin Kim, Chanwoo Park, Hyewon Jeong, Yik S Chan, Xuhai Xu, Daniel Mc-Duff, Hyeonhoon Lee, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Cynthia Breazeal, and Hae W Park. 2024. Mdagents: An adaptive collaboration of llms for medical decision-making. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 79410–79452. [15] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al .2023. Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 4015–4026. [16] Mingcheng Li, Xiaolu Hou, Ziyang Liu, Dingkang Yang, Ziyun Qian, Jiawei Chen, Jinjie Wei, Yue Jiang, Qingyao Xu, and Lihua Zhang. 2025. MCCD: Multi-Agent Collaboration-based Compositional Diffusion for Complex Text-to-Image Gener-ation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference .13263–13272. [17] Xiang Li, Duyi Pan, Hongru Xiao, Jiale Han, Jing Tang, Jiabao Ma, Wei Wang, and Bo Cheng. 2025. Dialogueagents: A hybrid agent-based speech synthesis framework for multi-party dialogue. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) . IEEE, 1–6. [18] Harold A Linstone, Murray Turoff, et al . 1975. The delphi method . Vol. 1975. Addison-Wesley Reading, MA. [19] Pei Liu, Xin Liu, Ruoyu Yao, Junming Liu, Siyuan Meng, Ding Wang, and Jun Ma. 2025. Hm-rag: Hierarchical multi-agent multimodal retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM international conference on multimedia .2781–2790. [20] Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, et al . 2024. Grounding dino: Marry-ing dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In European conference on computer vision . Springer, 38–55. [21] Geliang Ouyang, Jingyao Chen, Zhihe Nie, Yi Gui, Yao Wan, Hongyu Zhang, and Dongping Chen. 2025. nvagent: Automated data visualization from natural language via collaborative agent workflow. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) .19534–19567. [22] Qi Peng, Jialin Cui, Jiayuan Xie, Yi Cai, and Qing Li. 2025. Tree-of-Reasoning: Towards Complex Medical Diagnosis via Multi-Agent Reasoning with Evidence Tree. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia .1744–1753. [23] Abduljalil Radman and Jorma Laaksonen. 2025. TSAM: Temporal SAM Aug-mented with Multimodal Prompts for Referring Audio-Visual Segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 23947– 23956. [24] Wolf Rauch. 1979. The decision delphi. Technological forecasting and social change 

15, 3 (1979), 159–169. [25] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al . 2024. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 (2024). [26] Yan Rong, Jinting Wang, Guangzhi Lei, Shan Yang, and Li Liu. 2025. Audiogenie: A training-free multi-agent framework for diverse multimodality-to-multiaudio generation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia .8872–8881. [27] Haoyang Su, Renqi Chen, Shixiang Tang, Zhenfei Yin, Xinzhe Zheng, Jinzhe Li, Biqing Qi, Qi Wu, Hui Li, Wanli Ouyang, Philip Torr, Bowen Zhou, and Nanqing Dong. 2025. Many Heads Are Better Than One: Improved Scientific Idea Generation by A LLM-Based Multi-Agent System. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Moham-mad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 28201–28240. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1368 [28] Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al . 2024. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530 (2024). [29] Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. arXiv:2505.09388 [cs.CL] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388 [30] Murray Turoff. 1970. The design of a policy Delphi. Technological forecasting and social change 2, 2 (1970), 149–171. [31] Wiebe Van der Hoek and Michael Wooldridge. 2008. Multi-agent systems. Foun-dations of Artificial Intelligence 3 (2008), 887–928. [32] Haochun Wang, Sendong Zhao, Jingbo Wang, Zewen Qiang, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2025. Beyond Frameworks: Unpacking Collaboration Strategies in Multi-Agent Systems. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria, 21361–21375. doi:10.18653/v1/ 2025.acl-long.1037 [33] Yaoting Wang, Peiwen Sun, Dongzhan Zhou, Guangyao Li, Honggang Zhang, and Di Hu. 2024. Ref-avs: Refer and segment objects in audio-visual scenes. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 196–213. [34] Yuji Wang, Haoran Xu, Yong Liu, Jiaze Li, and Yansong Tang. 2025. SAM2-LOVE: Segment Anything Model 2 in Language-aided Audio-Visual Scenes. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 28932– 28941. [35] Zhefan Wang, Yuanqing Yu, Wendi Zheng, Weizhi Ma, and Min Zhang. 2024. Macrec: A multi-agent collaboration framework for recommendation. In Proceed-ings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . 2760–2764. [36] Dawei Xiang, Wenyan Xu, Kexin Chu, Tianqi Ding, Zixu Shen, Yiming Zeng, Jianchang Su, and Wei Zhang. 2025. Promptsculptor: Multi-agent based text-to-image prompt optimization. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations . 774–786. [37] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian Shi, Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, Yuanjun Lv, Yongqi Wang, Dake Guo, He Wang, Linhan Ma, Pei Zhang, Xinyu Zhang, Hongkun Hao, Zishan Guo, Baosong Yang, Bin Zhang, Ziyang Ma, Xipin Wei, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Peng Wang, Mingkun Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Xingzhang Ren, Bo Zheng, Rui Men, arXiv Preprint, March, 2026, arXiv.org Zhao et al. 

Fan Zhou, Bowen Yu, Jianxin Yang, Le Yu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2025. Qwen3-Omni Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17765 (2025). [38] Zekang Yang, Wang Zeng, Sheng Jin, Chen Qian, Ping Luo, and Wentao Liu. 2025. Nader: Neural architecture design via multi-agent collaboration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 4452–4461. [39] Kaining Ying, Henghui Ding, Guangquan Jie, and Yu-Gang Jiang. 2025. Towards omnimodal expressions and reasoning in referring audio-visual segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 22575– 22585. [40] Muhammad Imran Yousuf. 2007. Using expertsopinions through Delphi technique. 

Practical assessment, research, and evaluation 12, 1 (2007). [41] Yehang Zhang, Xinli Xu, Xiaojie Xu, Doudou Zhang, Li Liu, and Ying-Cong Chen. 2025. Orchestrating Audio: Multi-Agent Framework for Long-Video Audio Synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Car-olyn Rose, and Violet Peng (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, 22267–22282. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.1133 [42] Jinxing Zhou, Yanghao Zhou, Mingfei Han, Tong Wang, Xiaojun Chang, Hisham Cholakkal, and Rao Muhammad Anwer. 2025. Think before you segment: An object-aware reasoning agent for referring audio-visual segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04418 (2025). [43] Yucheng Zhou, Lingran Song, and Jianbing Shen. 2025. Mam: Modular multi-agent framework for multi-modal medical diagnosis via role-specialized collab-oration. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 .25319–25333.